‘THE PARAGUA. 171
have it, on the ground that it wanted repairs, We were, therefore,
obliged to take two small ones that would barely carry the trunks and
boxes, and embark ourselves in the canoe of the Portuguese.
We have found this man, Don Antonio da Costa Viana, and his
family, quite a treasure to us on the road. He is a stout, active little
fellow, about fifty years of age, with piercing black eyes, long black
curls, a face burned almost to negro blackness by the sun, deeply pitted
with the small-pox, and with a nose that, as Ijurra tells him, would make
a cut-water for a frigate. He is called paragud, (a species of parrot,)
from his incessant talk; and he brags that he is “as well known on the
river asa dog.” He has a chacra of sugar-cane and tobacco, with a
trapiche, at Tarapoto. He sells the spirits that he makes for tocuyo, and
carries the tocuyo, tobacco, and chancaca to Nauta, selling or rather ex-
changing as he goes. His canoe is fifty feet long and three broad, and
carries a cargo which he values at five hundred dollars ; that is, five hun-
dred in efectos—two hundred and fifty in money. It is well fitted with
armayari and pamacari, and carries six peons—Antonio, himself, his
wife, and his adopted daughter, a child of ten years; besides affording
room for the calls of hospitality. My friend is perfect master of all
around him ; (a little tyrannical, perhaps, to his family ;) knows all the
reaches and beaches of the river, and every tree and shrub that grows
upon its banks. He is intelligent, active, and obliging; always busy:
now twisting fishing-lines of the fibres of a palm.called chambira ; now
‘hunting turtle-eggs, robbing plantain-fields, or making me cigars of
tobacco-leaves given me by the priest of Chasuta. Every beach is a
house for him; his peons build his rancho and spread his musquito
curtain ; his wife and child cook his supper. His mess of salt fish, turtle-
eggs, and plantains isa feast for him ; and his gourd of coffee, and pipe
afterwards, a luxury that a king might envy. He is always. well and
happy. I imagine he has picked up and hoarded away, to keep him in
his old age, or to leave his wife when he dies, some few of the dollars
that are floating about here; and, in short, I don’t know a more enviable
person. It is true Dofia Antonio gets drunk occasionally ; but he licks
‘her if she is troublesome, and it seems to give him very little concern.
Isometimes twit him with the immorality of robbing the poor In-
dians of their plantains; but he defends himself by saying, “ That to take
plantains is not to steal; to take a knife, or a hatchet, or an article of
clothing, is; but plantains, not. Every body on the river does it. It is
necessary to have them, and he is perfectly willing to pay for them, if
he could find the owners and they would sell them.” ‘The old rascal is
very religious too; he has, hanging under the parmacari of his boat, a
172 = LAGUNA.
silver Crucifix and a wooden St. Anthony. He thinks a priest next of
kin to a saint, and a saint perfection. He said to me, as his wife was
combing her hair in the canoe, “A bald woman, Don Luis, must be a
very ugly thing: not so a bald man, because St. Peter, you know, was
bald ;” and I verily believe that, although he is very vain of his black
curls, were he to lose them, he would find consolation in the reflection
that he had made an approach, in appearance at least, towards his great
exemplar. ‘
We shoved off from Sta. Cruz at sunset, and camped on the beach a
mile lower down. It is very well to do this, for the canoe-men are taken
away from the temptation of the villages, and are sober and ready for
an early start next morning.
August 31.—Started at 6 a.m.3 camped on the beach at a quarter-
past 5 p.m. ‘
September 1—Heavy clouds and rains both to the northward and
eastward and southward and westward, with an occasional spit at us;
but we set the rain at defiance under the palm-thatched roof of Antonio.
_ At half-past 3 p. m. we arrived at Laguna. This town, the principal
one of: the district and the residence of the governor, is one and a half
mile from the port. The walk is a pleasant one through the forest at
this season, but is probably mud to the knees in the rains. It contains
one thousand and forty-four inhabitants; and the productions of the
neighborhood are wax, sarsaparilla, copal, copaiba, and salt fish. I have.
seen all these in the hands of the Indians, but in small eC there
being so little demand for them.
The Cocamillas, who form the largest part of the populate of
Laguna, are lazy and drunken. They are capital boatmen, however,
when they have no liquor; and I had more comfort with them than
with any other Indians except those of Tingo Maria.
September 2.—Waiting for boats and boatmen. There are no large
canoes, and we are again compelled to take two. I was surprised at
this as I was led to believe—and I thought it probable—that the nearer
we got to the Marafion the larger we should find the boats, and the
means of navigation more complete. But I have met with nothing but
misstatements in my whole course. The impression I received in Lima
of the Montana was, that it was a country abounding not only with the
necessaries, but with the luxuries of life, so far as eating was concerned.
Yet I am now satisfied that if one hundred men were to start without
provisions, on the route I have travelled, the half must inevitably perish
for want of food. Of meat there is almost none; and even salt fish,
yuceas, and plantains are scarce, and often not to be had; game is
TRAVELLING MERCHANTS. 173
shy; and the fish, of which there are a great number, do not readily
take the hook; ws fruit I have seen literally none edible since leaving
Huanuco.
At Chasuta I was assured that I should find at Yoitfipuas every
facility for the prosecution of my journey; yet I could get neither a
boat nor a man, and had to persuade my Chasuta boatmen to carry me
on to Sta. Cruz, where the Yurimaguas people said there would be no
further difficulty. At Sta. Cruz I could get but two small and rotten
canoes, with three men to each, for Laguna, which, being the great port
of the river, could in the estimation of the people at Sta. Cruz, furnish
me with the means of crossing the Atlantic if necessary. I had been
always assured that I could get at Laguna one hundred Cocamillas, if I
wanted them, as a force to enter among the savages of the Ucayali;
but here, too, I could with difficulty get six men and two small canoes
to pass me on to ‘Nauta, which I expected to find, from the description
of the people above, a small New York. Had it not been that Senhor
Cauper, at that t place, had just then a boat unemployed, which he was
willing to sell, “I should have had to abandon my expedition up the
Ucayali, and build me a raft to float down the Maranon.
We found at the port of Laguna two travelling merchants, a, Bap
guese and a Brazilian. They had four large boats of about eight tons
each, and two or three canoes. Their cargo consisted of iron, steel,
jron implements, crockery-ware, wine, brandy, copper kettles, coarse,
short swords, (a very common implement of the Indians,) guns, ammu-
nition, salt fish, &c., which they expected to exchange in Moyobamba
and Chachapoyas for straw-hats, tocuyo, sugar, coffee, and money,
They were also buying up all the sarsaparilla they could find, and
despatching it back in canoes. They gave for the arroba, of twenty-
five pounds, three dollars and fifty cents in goods, which probably cost
in Pard one dollar. They estimated the value of their cargoes at five
thousand dollars. I have no doubt that two thousand dollars in money
would have bought the whole concern, boats and all; and that with
this the traders would have drifted joyfully down the river, well satisfied
with their year’s work. They invited us to breakfast off roast pig; and
I thought that I never tasted anything better than the farinha, which I
saw for the first time.
Farinha is.a general substitute for bread in all the course of the
Amazon below the Brazilian frontier. It is used by all classes, and in
immense quantities by the Indians an! laborers. Our boatmen in
Brazil were always contented with plenty of salt fish and farinha,
Eyery two or three hours of the day, whilst travelling, they would stop
174 MAKING FARINHA.
rowing, pour a little water upon a large gourd-full of farinha, and pass
around the mass (which they called pirdo) as if it were a delicacy.
The women generally make the farinha. They soak the root of the
mandioc (Jatropha Manihot) in water till it is softened a little, when
they scrape off the skin, and grate it upon a board smeared with some
of the adhesive gums of the forest and sprinkled with pebbles. The
white grated mass is put in a conical-shaped bag, made of the coarse
fibres of a palm, and called fapiti. The bag is hung up to a peg
driven into a tree, or a post of the shed; a lever is put through a loop
at the bottom of the bag; the short end of the lever is placed under a
chock nailed to the post below, and the woman hangs her weight on
the long end. This elongates the bag, and brings a heavy pressure
upon the mass within, causing all the juice to ooze out through the
interstices of the wicker-work of the bag. When sufficiently pressed
the mass is put on the floor of a mud oven; heat is applied, and it
js stirred with a stick till it granulates in very irregular grains, (the
largest about the size of our No. 2 shot,) and is sufficiently toasted to
drive off all the poisonous qualities which it has in a trude state. It
is then packed in baskets (lined and covered with palm-leaves) of
about sixty-four pounds weight, which are generally sold, all along the
river, at from seventy-five cents to one dollar. The sediment of the
juice which runs from the tapiti is tapioca, and is used to make cus-
tards, puddings, starch, &ec.
September 3.—Our boatmen came down to the port at 8a.m. They
were accompanied, as usual, by their wives, carrying their bedding,
their jars of masato, and even their paddles; for these fellows are too
lazy, when on shore, to do a hand’s turn; though when embarked they
work freely, (these Cocamillas,) and are gay, cheerful, ready, and obe-
dient. The dress of the women is nothing more than a piece of cot-
ton cloth, generally dark brown in color, wrapped around the loins
and reaching to the knee. I was struck with the appearance of one,
the only pretty Indian girl I have seen. She appeared to be about
thirteen years of age, and was the wife of one of our boatmen. It was.
amusing to see’ the slavish respect with which she waited upon the
young savage, (himself about nineteen,) and the lordly indifference with
which he received her attentions. She was as straight as an arrow, »
delicately and elegantly formed, and had a free, wild, Indian look, that
was quite taking. +
We got off at a quarter past nine; the merchants at the same time;
and the padre also returns to-day to Yurimaguas; so that we make a
haul upon the population of Laguna, and carry off about seventy of its
MOUTH OF THE HUALLAGA. 175
inhabitants. Twenty-five miles below Laguna, we arrived at the mouth
of the Huallaga. Several islands occupy the middle of it. The chan-
nel runs near the left bank. Near the middle of the river we had nine
feet; passing towards the left bank we suddenly fell into forty-five feet.
The Huallaga, just above the island, is three hundred and fifty yards
wide; the Amazon, at the junction, five hundred. The water of both
rivers is very muddy and filthy, particularly that of the former, which
for some distance within the mouth is covered with a glutinous scum,
that I take to be the excrement of fish, probably that of porpoises.
The Huallaga, from Tingo Maria, the head of canoe navigation, to
Chasuta, (from which point to its mouth it is navigable for a draught
of five feet at the lowest stage of the river,) is three hundred and
twenty-five miles long; costing seventy-four working hours to descend
it; and falling four feet and twenty-seven hundredths per mile. From
Chasuta to its mouth it has two hundred and eighty-five miles of
length, and takes sixty-eight hours of descent, falling one foot and
twenty-five hundredths per mile. It will be seen that these distances
are passed in nearly proportional times. This is to be attributed to the
time occupied in descending the malos pasos, for the currrent is more
rapid above than below. The difference between the times of ascent
and descent is, on an average, about three for one. It is proper to
state here that all my estimates of distance, after embarkation upon
the rivers, being obtained from measurement by the log-line, are in
geographical miles of sixty to the degree.
176 . THE AMAZON.
CHAPTER IX.
Entrance into the Amazon—Nauta—Upper and Lower Missions of Mainas—
Conversions of the Ucayali—Trade in sarsaparilla—Advantages of trade with
this country.
The river upon which we now entered is the main trunk of the
Amazon, which carries its Peruvian name of Maranon as far as Taba-
tinga, at the Brazilian frontier ; below which, and as far as the junction
of the Rio Negro, it takes the name of Solimoens; ‘and thence to the
ocean is called Amazon. It isthe same stream throughout, and to avoid
confusion I shall ¢all it Amazon from this point to the sea. .
The march of the great river in its silent grandeur was sublime; but
in the untamed might of its turbid waters, as they cut away its banks,
tore down the gigantic denizens of the forest, and built up islands, it was
awful. It rolled through the wilderness with a stately and solemn air.
Its waters looked angry, sullen, and relentless; and the whole scene
awoke emotions of awe and dread—such as are caused by the funeral
solemnities, the minute gun, the howl of the wind, and the angry tossing
of the waves, when all hands are called to bury the dead in a troubled
sea,
I was reminded of our Mississippi at its topmost flood; the waters
are quite as muddy and quite as turbid; but this stream lacked the
charm and the fascination which the plantation upon the bank, the city
upon the bluff, and the steamboat upon its waters, lends to its fellow of
the North; nevertheless, I felt pleased at its sight. I had already
travelled seven hundred miles by water, and fancied that this powerful
stream would soon carry me to the ocean; but the water-travel was
comparatively just begun; many a weary month was to elapse ere I
should again look upon the familiar face of the sea; and many a time,
when worn and wearied with the canoe life, did I exclaim, “This river
seems interminable !” .
Its capacities for trade and commerce are inconceivably great. Its
industrial future is the most dazzling ; and to the touch of steam, settle-
ment, and cultivation, this rolling stream and its magnificent water-shed
would start up into a display of industrial results that would indicate
the Valley of the Amazon as one of the most enchanting regions on the
face of the earth.
SAN PAULO. 939
A small river, called Tucuby, empties into the Yavari at forty-five
miles from its mouth, and on the eastern side. A hundred and fifty
miles further up enters a considerable river, called the Curuz, also from
the east. M. Castelnau thinks, however, from report, that the Curuzd
is not navigable upwards more than ninety miles, Sugar-cane is some-
times seen floating on the water of the Jacarana, which indicates that
its upper parts are inhabited by people who have communication, more
or less direct, with white men. (Castelnau, vol. 5, page 52.)
December ‘i.—The river now has lost its name of Marafion, and, since
the junction of the Yavari, is called Solimoens. It is here a mile and
a half wide, sixty-six feet deep in the middle, and has a current of two
miles and three-quarters per hour. The small boat in which we carry
our animals did not stop with us last night, but passed on without be-
ing noticed. She had all our fowls and turtles; so that our breakfast
this morning consisted of boiled rice. We drifted with the tide all
night, stopping for an hour in consequence of a severe squall of wind
and rain from the eastward.
December 8.—Rainy morning. We arrived at San Paulo at 10 a.m.
This village is on a hill two or three hundred feet above the present
level of the river—the highest situation I have yet seen. The ascent to
the town is very difficult and tedious, particularly after a rain, the soil
being of white clay. On the top of this hill is a moist, grassy plain,
which does not extend far back. The site is said not to be healthy, on
account of swamps back of it. The population is three hundred and
fifty, made up of thirty whites, and the rest Tucunas and Juries Indians.
The commandant is the Lieutenant Don “José Patricio de Santa Ana.”
He gave us a good breakfast and some statistics. The yearly exports
of San Paulo are eight thousand pounds of sarsaparilla, worth one thou-
-sand dollars; four hundred and fifty pots of manteca, or oil made from
turtle-eggs, worth five hundred and fifty dollars; and three thousand
two hundred pounds of cocoa, worth sixty-four dollars. These are all
sent to Egas. Common English prints sell for thirty cents the covado,
(about three-fourths of a yard,) and coarse, strong cotton cloth, (gener-
ally American,) for thirty-seven and a half cents the vara, (three inches
less than a yard.) We left San Paulo at half-past 3 p. m., and drifted
with the current all night. Distance from Tabatinga to San Paulo,
ninety-five miles.
December 9—At half-past 8 a. m. we arrived at Maturd, a settle-
ment of four or five huts, (with only one occupied,) on a muddy bank.
Tts distance from San Paulo is fifty miles. The shores of the river
are generally low, though there are reaches where its banks are forty
240 RIVER ICA.
or fifty feet high, commonly of white or red clay. There is much
colored earth on the banks of the river—red, yellow, and white—which
those people who have taste make use of to plaster the inside of their
houses. The banks are continually falling into the stream, sometimes
in very large masses, carrying trees along with them, and forming one
of the dangers and impediments to upward navigation where the boats
have to keep close in shore to avoid the current.
We passed through a strait, between two islands, where the river was
not more than eighty yards wide. It presented a singular contrast to
the main river, to which we had become so much accustomed that this
looked like a rivulet. It had forty eight feet depth, and two and a quar-
ter miles current.
At half-past four we entered the mouth of the Iga, or Putumayo,
fifteen miles from Maturd. This is a fine-looking river, half a mile
broad at the mouth, and opening into an estuary (formed by the left
bank of the Amazon and islands on the right hand) of a mile in width.
We found one hundred and thirty-eight feet in the middle of the mouth,
and a current of two miles and three-quarters an hour. The water is
clearer than that of the Amazon. A man at Z'unantins, who had navi-
gated this river a good deal, told me that one might ascend in a canoe
for three and a half months, and that the current was so rapid that the
same distance might be run down in fifteen days. This I think incredi-
ble; but there is no doubt that the Iga is a very long and very rapid
river. LHe described it as shallow after two months of navigation up-
wards, with large sand-beaches, and many small streatns emptying into
it, on which is found much sarsaparilla. Many slaves of the Brazilians
escape by way of this river into New Grenada.
San Antonio is a village about two miles below the mouth of the
Iga. It is a collection of four or five houses of Brazilians, and a few
Indian huts. The people seemed mad for tobacco, and begged me
earnestly to sell them some. I told them I would not sell for money,
but I was willing to exchange for things to eat, or for rare birds and
beasts. They ransacked the town, but could only raise five fowls, half
a dozen eggs, two small turtles, and three bunches of plantains, They
had no animals but such as I already had, and I only bought a macaw
and a “pavoncito,” or little peacock. The little tobacco I gave for
these things, however, was not enough to give everybody a smoke, and
they implored me to sell them some for money. They came to the
canoe after night, and showed so strong a desire to have it that I feared
they would rob me. Finding me inexorable, they went off abusing me,
which excited the wrath of Ijurra to a high pitch. Our stock of to-
TUNANTINS. 241
bacco, which we had bought in Nauta, was now very much reduced.
We had used it, during our voyage on the Ucayali, to purchase food and
curiosities, and to give to the peons, who were not satisfied or contented
unless they had an occasional smoke. We also had been liberal with
it to governors and curates, who had been civil to us; and now we had
barely enough for our own use to last us to Barra. I gave twenty-five
cents the mass for it in Nauta, though the “ Paragu4” cheated me, and.
should only have charged me twelve and a half. We could have sold
it allthe way to Barra for thirty-seven anda half, and fifty cents.
December 10.—Between San Antonio and Tunantins we met the
governor of San Antonio, a military-looking white man, returning with
his wife and children from a visit to Tunantins. I showed him my
passport, which he asked for, and we interchanged civilities and presents;
he giving me a “ chiriclis,” ike the one I lost at Caballo-cocha, and
water-melons ; and I making him a present of tobacco and a tinder-box.
The species of bird he gave me is called, in Brazil, Marianita. This one
took a singular disease by which it lost the use of its legs—hopped about
for some days on the knee-joints, with the leg and foot turned upwards in
front, and then died. At twenty miles from San Antonio we entered the
mouth of the Tunantins river. It is about fifty yards broad, and seems
deep, with a considerable current. The town is prettily situated on a
slight green eminence on the left bank, about half a mile from the
mouth. The population is said to be between two and three hundred,
though I would not suppose it to be near as much. It is composed.
of the tribes of Cayshanas and Juries, and about twenty-five whites.
One sees very few Indians in the Portuguese villages. They seem to
live apart, and in the woods; and are, I think, gradually disappearing
before the advance of civilization. They are used as beasts of burden,
and are thought no further of. At 2 p. m. we left Tunantins. The
river has eighteen, twenty-four, and thirty feet down to its entrance into
the Amazon, where it forms a bar of sand, stretching some hundreds of
yards out and downwards, on which is only six feet of water.
December 11.—We stopped at a factoria on the left bank, sixty-five
miles from Tunantins, where people were making manteiga. The effect of
“mirage,” was here very remarkable. When within a mile or two of the
factoria, I thought I saw quite a large town, with houses of two or three
stories, built of stone and brick, with large heaps of white stone lying
about in several places. There was a vessel lying off the town that I
was satisfied was a large brig-of-war ; but upon drawing near, my three-
-story houses dwindled to the smallest palm ranchos ; my heaps of build-
16
CONNEXION OF THE AMAZON AND LA PLATA. 3801
The decrease in the consumption of farinha is significant, and shows
an increased consumption of flour from the United States.
I had from Capt. Hislop, an old Scotchman, resident of Santarem,
and who had traded much with Cuiaba, in the province of Matto Grosso,
the following notices of the river Tapajos, and its connexion with the
Atlantic, by means of the rivers Paraguay and La Plata. .
Hence to the port of Itaituba, the river is navigable for large vessels,
against a strong current, for fifteen days, The distance is about two
hundred miles. From Itaituba the river is navigable for boats of six or
eight tons, propelled by paddling, poling, or warping. There are some
fifteen or twenty caxoieras, or rapids, to pass, where the boat has to be
unloaded and the cargoes carried round on the backs of the crew. At
one or two the boat itself has to be hauled over the land,
The voyage to the head of navigation on the Rio Preto, a confluent
of the Tapajos, occupies about two months. At this place mules are
found to carry the cargo fifteen miles, to the village of Diamantino,
situated on the high lands that divide the headwaters of the streams
flowing south from those of the streams flowing north, which approach
each other at this point very closely.
These high lands are rich in diamonds and minerals. I saw some in
possession of Capt. Hislop. The gold dust is apparently equal in quality
to that I had seen from California.
From Diamantino to Cuiaba the distance is ninety miles, the road
crossing the Paraguay river, which there, at some seasons, is nearly dry
and muddy, and at others a rapid and deep stream, dangerous for the
mules to pass.
Some years ago a shorter land-carriage was discovered between the
headwaters of the northern and southern streams.
By ascending the Arinos, a river which empties into the Tapajos,
below the mouth of the Preto, a point was reached within eighteen
miles by land-carriage of a navigable point on the Cuiaba river above
the city. The boat was hauled over these eighteen miles by oxen,
(showing that the passage can be neither very high nor rugged,) and
launched upon the Cuiaba, which is navigable thence to the city.
This was about three years ago; but the trade, for some reason, is
still carried on by the old route of the Preto, and the land-carriage of
one hundred and five miles to Cuiaba,
A person once attempted to descend by the San Manoel, a river that
rises in the same high lands as the Preto and Arinos, and empties into
the Tapajos, far below them; but he encountered so many obstructions
to navigation that he lost all but life.
302 CUIABA.
The passage from Diamantino to Santarem occupies about twenty-
six days.
Cuiaba is a flourishing town of about ten thousand inhabitants, situ-
ated on the river of the same name, which is thence navigable for large
vessels to its junction with the Paraguay, which river is free from im-
pediments’ to the ocean. It is the chief town of the rich province of
Matto Grosso. It receives its supplies—the lighter articles of merchan-
dise and luxury—by land, from Rio Janeiro; and its heavier articles—
such as cannot be transported on mules for a great distance—by this
route of the Tapajos. These are principally salt, iron, iron implements,
wines, liquors, arms, crockeries, and guaran, of which the people there
are passionately fond.
St. Ubes or Portuguese salt is worth in Cuiaba thirteen and a half
dollars the panero, of one hundred and eight pounds. Lately, however,
salt has been discovered on the bottom and shores of a lake in Bolivia,
near the Paraguay river. It undergoes some process to get rid of its
impurities, and then is sold at four dollars the panero.
Cuiaba pays for these things in diamonds, gold dust, and hides. The
diamond region is, as I have before said, in the neighborhood of the
village of Diamantino, situated on the high lands that divide the head-
waters of the tributaries of the Amazon and La Plata. M. Castelnau
visited this country, and I give the following extracts from his account
of it. He says:
“The mines of gold, and especially those of diamonds, to which the
city of Diamantino owes its foundation and its importance, appear to
have been known from the time the Pawlistas made their first settle-
ments in the province of Matto Grosso; but, under the Portuguese
government, the working of the diamond mines was prohibited to indi-
viduals under the severest penalties.
“A military force oecupied the diamond districts, and watched the
Crown slaves who labored in the search of this precious mineral. Every
person finding one of these stones was obliged to remit it to the super-
intendency of diamonds at Cuyaba, for which he received a moderate
recompense, whilst he would have been severely punished if detected in
appropriating it.
“At this period, throughout Brazil, the commerce in diamonds was
prohibited, as strictly as their extraction, to all except the special poe
named by the government for this purpose.
“Subsequently to the government of Joao Carlos, of whom we have
already spoken, this commerce became more or less tolerated, then alto-
gether free.
DIAMOND REGION. . 303
“Tf, as we are assured, the laws which heretofore governed this branch
of industry are not legally repealed, they have at least completely fallen
into disuse. The inhabitants of Diamantino only complain that the
prohibition of the slave trade renders it impossible for them to profit by
the wealth of the country.
In 1746 valuable diamonds were found, for the first time, in Matto
Grosso, and were soon discovered in great quantities in the little river of
Ouro. The governor, Manuel Antunes Nogueiza, designing to take
possession of these lands for the benefit of the Crown, ejected the in-
habitants therefrom. Famine made great ravages among the wretches
thus deprived of their homes.
“From that time the country seems to have suffered every evil. A
long drought was followed by a terrible earthquake on the 24th Sep-
tember, 1746. It was not until May 13, 1805, that the inhabitants
were again permitted to take possession of their property, but upon
condition of remitting to the Crown, under severe penalties, all the dia-
monds found.
“In 1809 a royal mandate established at Cuyab& a diamond junta.
“Gold and diamonds, which are always united in this region, as in
many others, are found especially in the numerous water-courses which
furrow it, and also throughout the whole country.
“ After the rains, the children of Diamantino hunt for the gold con-
tained in the earth even of the streets, and in the bed of the river Ouro,
_which, as has been said, passes through the city; and they often collect
to the value of one or two patacas (from eight to fifteen grains) Brazil
weight.
“ It is related that a negro, pulling vegetables in his garden, found a
diamond in the earth attached to the roots. It is also said that, shortly
before our arrival at Diamantino, a muleteer, driving a stake in the
ground to tie his mules to, found a diamond of the weight of a demi-
oitavo, (about nine carats) This last circumstance occurred in the
chapada (table-land) of San Pedro.
“ We have heard it stated that diamonds are sometimes found in the
stomachs of the fowls.
“The rivers Diamantino, Oure, and Paraguay appear already to be
completely exhausted. The river Burité continues to furnish many
stones; but the Santa Anna, so to speak, is still virgin, and, notwith-
standing the incredible quantity of diamonds taken from it, it does not
appear to have lost its primitive richness.
“Tt would appear, however, that diamond-hunting is not as produc-
tive as it is believed; for they quote in the country, as very remarkable,
216 IQUITOS.
legislation, from the payment of the contribution of seven dollars per
head, paid towards the support of the government by all the other In-
dians of Peru. This exception was made on the ground that these
people had the forest to subdue, and were only able to wring a hard-
earned support from the cultivation of the land. Many persons belong- _
ing to the province think that this was an unwise law, and that the -
character of the Indian has deteriorated since its passage. They think
that some law compelling them to work would be beneficial to both -
country and inhabitants.
Fearful of going to the right of Tquitos island, and thus passing the
town, I passed to the left cf some islands, which Smyth lays down on
his chart as small, but which are at this season large; and in running
between the one just above Iquitos island and the left bank of the river,
the boat grounded near the middle of the passage, which was one hun-
dred and fifty yards broad, and came near rolling over from the velocity
of the current. We hauled over to the left bank and passed close along
it in forty-two feet water. At half-past 9 p.m. we arrived at Iquitos.
November 7—Iquitos is a fishing village of two hundred and twenty-
seven inhabitants; a considerable part of them, to the number of ninety-
eight, being whites and Mestizos of San Borja, and other-.settlements of
the upper Mission, who were driven from their homes a few years ago
by the Huambisas of the Pastaza and Santiago, This occurred in 1841.
In 1848, these same Indians murdered all the inhabitants of a village
called Sta. Teresa, situated on the upper Marajion, between the mouths
of the rivers Santiago and Morona. My companion Ijurra was there
soon after the occurrence. He gave the dead bodies burial, and pub-
lished in his Travels in Mainas a detailed account of the affair.
In October, 1843, Tjurra, with seventeen other young men of Moyo-
bamba, formed a company for the purpose of washing for gold thesands
of the Santiago; they were furnished with arms by the prefecture, and
recruited sixty-six Cocamillas of Laguna, armed with bows and arrows,
as a light proteeting force. They also engaged eighty-five of the In-
dians of Jeveros as laborers at the washings; and, after they started,
were joined by four hundred and fifty of the people who had been ex-
pelled in 1841 from Santiago and Borja, desirous of recovering their
homes and taking vengeance of the savages.
* The party went by land from Moyobamba to Balza Puerto; thence
north to Jeveros; and thence to the port of Barranca, at the mouth of the
river Cahuapanas, when they embarked to-ascend the Amazon to the
mouth of the Santiago. At Barranca they received intelligence of the
massacre at Sta. Teresa, with the details.
MASSACRE AT STA. TERESA. PAiV7/
A Moyobambino, Canuto Acosta, fearing that the company would
get all the gold, and that he should not be able to collect a little that
was due him by the people about Sta. Teresa, hastened on before. He
met at Sta. Teresa with a large party of Huambisas, who had come
down the Santiago for the ostensible purpose of trade. Conversing with
the curaca of the tribe, named Ambuscha, Acosta told him that a mul-
titude of Christians were coming with arms in their hands to conquer
- ‘and enslave his people. The curaca, turning the conversation, asked
Acosta what he had in his packages. The reply was more foolish and
wicked than the other speech; for, desirous to play upon the credulity
of the Indian, or to overawe him, he said that he had in his packages a
great many epidemic diseases, with which he could kill the whole tribe
-of the Huambisas. It was his death warrant. The curaca plunged his
spear into his*body, and giving a shrill whistle, his people, who were seat-
tered about among the houses, commenced the massacre. They killed
forty-seven men, and carried off sixty women ; some few persons escaped
into the woods. The Indians spared two boys—one of seven and one of
nine years—dnd set them adrift upon the Amazon on a raft, with a mes-
sage to the gold-hunting company that they knew of their approach,
and were ready, with the assistance of their friends, the Paturos and
Chinganos, to meet and dispute with them the possession of the country.
The raft was seen floating past Barranca and brought in.
The gold-seekers found no gold upon the borders of the Maraiion;
‘ quarrelled; became afraid of the savages; broke up and abandoned
their purpose before they reached the mouth of the Santiago.
Jjurra and a few others then turned their attention to the collection
of Peruvian bark. They spent two or three years in the woods, about
the mouth of the Huallaga; gathered an enormous quantity, and floated
it down to Paré on immense rafts, that Ijurra describes as floating-
houses, with all the comforts and conveniences of the house on shore.
When they arrived at Parad the cargo was examined by chymists;
said by them to be good; and a mercantile house offered eighty thou-
sand dollars for it. They refused the offer ; chartered a vessel, and took
the cargo to Liverpool, where the chymist pronounced the fruit of years
of labor to be utterly worthless.
The village of Iquitos is situated on an elevated plain, which is said
to extend far back from the shores of the river. This is different from
the situation of many towns upon the Amazon, most of which are built
upon a hill, with a low, swampy country behind them. There are cotton
and coffee-trees growing in the streets of the village, but no attention is
paid to the cultivation of either. A small stream, said to be one of the
218 THE RIVER.
mouths of the river Nanay, enters the Amazon just above the town.
The main mouth of the Nanay is five miles below; it is said to commu-
nicate, back of the plain, with the Tigre Yacu, which empties into the
Marajion above San Regis; and branches of it, which run to the north-
ward and eastward, inosculate with the Napo.
We left Iquitos at half past 9. a.m. The shores of the river just:
below are bold, and of white clay; at a quarter to eleven we passed the {
mouth of the emery about one hundred and fifty yards broad. The
depth of the Amazon at the junction of the two rivers is fifty feet; the
current a mile and two-thirds the hour. After passing several small
islands, where the river appeared two miles wide, it seemed to contract
within its own banks to half a mile, immediately-in front of a settlement
of two or three houses, called Tinicuro, where I found no,bottom at one
hundred and eighty feet; at half-past five we arrived at Pucallpa, where
we passed the night. '
November 8.—Pucallpa, or New Oran, is a small settlement, of twenty
houses, and one hundred and eleven inhabitants, who formerly belonged |
to Oran, but who, finding their situation uncomfortable, removed and
settled here. It is one of the most pleasantly-situated places I have
seen—on a moderate eminence, with green banks shelving to the river.
The water is bold (twenty-five to thirty feet deep) close to the shore.
Two islands—one above and one below the town, with a narrow opening
in front—gave the place the appearance of a snug little harbor.
We bought at this place two of the great cranes of the river, called
Tuyuyti. These were gray. <A pair that I succeeded in getting to the
United States were white. Started at 4a.m.; high white chalky banks
just below Pucallpa, At nine we arrived at the mouth of the Napo; we
found it two hundred yards broad, and of a gentle current. The sound-
ings across the mouth were thirty-five and forty feet; stopped at Choro-
cocha, a settlement of eighteen inhabitants, just below the mouth of the
Napo. We found some of our Nauta friends here salting fish, and got
a capital breakfast from them. After leaving, we anchored near the
head of a small island, where I supposed we would feel the effect of the
current of the Napo; but had but a mile and two-thirds current.
November 9.—We started at 5, and arrived at Pebas at 10 a. m.
We found that the people of Pebas, under the direction of Father
Valdivia, (my Nauta friend,) were establishing a new town about a
quarter of a mile up a stream called Ambiyacu, which enters into the
Amazon two miles above Pebas. We pulled up this stream, and found
the good priest and the governor general busy in directing the felling
of trees and building of houses. I determined to stay here for some
160 TOBACCO.
from the high lands above it; cattle thrive well; and its coffee, tobacco,
sugar-cane, rice, and maize are of fine quality. It is true that vessels
cannot come up to Shapaja, the port of the town of Tarapoto; but a
good road may be made from this town eighteen miles to Chasuta, to
which vessels of five feet draught may come at the lowest stage of the
river, and any draught at high water. Tarapoto is situated on an
elevated plain twenty miles in diameter; is seventy miles from Moyo-
bamba, the capital of the province, a city of seven thousand inhabitants ;
and has close around it the villages of Lamas. Tabalosas, Juan Guerra,
and Shapaja.
The Uvayali is navigable higher up than this point, and the quality
of cotton and coffee seems better, within certain limits, further from the
equator. But the settler at the head-waters of the Ucayali has to
place himself in a profound wilderness, with the forest and the savage
to subdue, and entirely dependent upon his own resources. I think he
would be better placed near where he can get provisions and assistance
whilst he is clearing the forest and planting his fields. I am told that
the governors of the districts in all the province of Mainas have
authority to give titles to land to any one who desires to cultivate it.
I saw here very fine fields of Indian corn. The stalk grows quite as
high as on our best bottom-lands in Virginia, and the ears were full, and
of good grain. It may be planted at any time, and it yields in three
months, thus giving four crops a year. A considerable quantity of
tobacco is also cultivated in the neighborhood of Tarapoto. The
tobacco seed is planted in carefully-prepared ground in October. At
this time the forest is cleared to make the plantation. In January the
seedlings are ready to transplant, when the wood that has been cut
down is set fire to, and the plantation cleared up ready to receive the
plants. When the plant is about two feet high, the top is cut off, and
the lower leaves, which are generally injured by the cirt, pulled off, so
that the force of the plant may be thrown into the middle leaves. The
crop is gathered, as the leaves ripen, in July and August. They are
put under shelter for a few days to turn yellow, and are then exposed
for three or four days to the sun and dew. After this, they are some-
times sprinkled with a little molasses and water, and rolled out flat with
a wooden roller; the larger stems are taken out, and they are then put
up in long masses of about one and a half pound weight, and wrapped
tightly and closely with some running vine ef the forest. This is the
common method ; and the common tobacco of Tarapoto is worth twelve
anda half cents (money) the mass there. A superior kind, made with
more care, and put up in short, thick masses, called andullo, is also
FISHING PARTY. 161
made in the province. This is worth twenty-five cents. The best
tobacco is made in Xederos, in the upper mission, and is sent to Lima.
* August 21.—We started for Juan Guerra on horseback, in company
with a large fishing-party, got up by the Padre for his own profit; he
seemed to carry nearly the whole town with him. The mounted party
consisted of eight. There were two ladies along, whose company added
to the gaiety and pleasure of the canter through the woods. Used as
Thad become by my travels in various parts of the world to the free
and easy, I must confess that I was a little startled to see these ladies,
when we arrived at Juan Guerra, denude themselves to a silk handker-
chief around the loins, and bathe in the river within forty yards, and in
full sight of all the men.
Arrived at Juan Guerra, we embarked upon the Cumbasa, which
empties intothe Mayo. Half an hour’s dragging of the canoe over the
shoals, and between the fallen trees on this stream, and one anda half
hour’s navigation on the Mayo, carried us to its mouth, which is only a
"quarter of a mile above Shapaja, where Morey had the goodness to land
us, and then shoved off to join the priest, who was to camp on a beach
above. —
The fishing-party of the padre was a large affair. They had four or
five canoes, and a large quantity of barbasco. The manner of fishing
is to close up the mouth of a cano of the river with a net-work made of
reeds, and then, mashing the barbasco root to a pulp, throw it into the
water. This turns the water white, and poisons it, so that the fish soon
commence rising to the surface dead, and are taken into the canoes
with small tridents. “ Almost at the moment of throwing the barbasco
into the water, the smaller fish rise to the surface and die in two or
three minutes; the larger fish survive longer; and, therefore, a successful
fishing of this sort is a matter of half a day, or till the canoes are filled.
When we left Shapaja for Tarapoto, we placed our trunks, several
without locks, in charge of the women who lived in the shed where we
slept; and, although they knew that the trunks contained handkerchiefs,
red cotton cloth, beads, scissors, dc., (things which they most desire,)
we missed nothing on our return.
August 22,—Two miles below Shapaja is the mal-paso of Estero,
A point of rocks, stretching out from a little stream that enters on the
left, makes this rapid, which is considered a very dangerous one.. The
stream, rushing against these rocks, is deflected to a point of rocks that
makes out into the river a little lower down on the other side; this
turns it aside again, and the waves mingle and boil below. The canoe
-was unloaded, and conducted by sogas or ropes of vine, over and be-
11
162 © CHASUTA.
tween the rocks on the left-hand side. It took an hour to unload, pass
the canoe, and load up again. Three miles further is the mal-paso of
Canoa Yacu, (canoe water,) from many canoes having been wrecked
here. This is by far the most formidable rapid I have seen. There is
a small perpendicular fall on each side, and a shoot of 20° declivity in
the middle, down which the water rushes with a velocity of at least ten
miles the hour. The shoot looks tempting, and dne is disposed to try
the rush; but there are rocks below, over which the water dashes up
some two or three feet in height; and I think no boat could shoot out
of the force of the stream so as to avoid these rocks.
The river both here and at Estero is not more than thirty yards
wide. The average velocity of the current through the Pongo is six
miles the hour. It took one hour and a half to pass this obstruction.
Two miles further down we shot the mal-paso of Matijuelo under oar;
and immediately after, that of Chumia, where the canoe was let
down as before, but without unloading. It took half an hour to do
this. A quarter of an hour afterwards we passed the rapid of Vaquero ;
and at 24 p. m. arrived at Chasuta. We were kindly welcomed and
hospitably entertained by the Cura, Don Sebastian Castro.
Chasuta is the port of the district of Tarapoto. The traders have
their cargoes carried on the backs of Indians between Tarapoto and
Chasuta, and embark and disembark at the latter place to avoid the
rapids of the Pongo. The distance by land, according to Hacket, is
eighteen miles; and the cost of transportation, half a pound of wax for
a cargoe of seventy-five pounds. There is from this point no further
obstruction to navigation for canoes; and very little labor would enable
a draught of six feet to reach Chasuta at the lowest stage of the river.
There were canoes in the port, just arrived from below, with salt fish
and wax; and canoes about to start down with the products of the
district. The annual value of the commerce between this place and
below is fifteen hundred dollars. All articles which can readily be
transported on the backs of mules, or Indians, come from Lima, by the
way of Chachapoyas and Moyobamba. These are principally articles
of wearing apparel, or stuff tomake them of. Heavier articles—such as
iron, iron implements, copper kettles, (for distilling,) guns, crockery,
&c.—come from below. The axes are narrow, worthless things, made in
Portugal, and sold in Tarapoto for a dollar in money, without handles.
Tron (of which the inhabitants are very careful to buy Swedish only)
is worth in Tarapoto twelve and a half cents the pound. ‘A common
plate for the dinner table is worth twenty-five cents; a cup and saucer,
twelve and a half cents; a glass with handle to drink water, fifty cents ;
BEGGARS IN A BOAT. 158
native man. The old woman was a small romance in herself. I had
fooked at her with interest as she cooked our supper. She wore a
costume that is sometimes, though not often, seen in this country. The
body, or upper part of the dress, which was black, consisted of two
parts—one coming up from the waist behind and covering the back,
the other in front, covering the breast; the two tied together over each
shoulder with strings, leaving her lank sides and long skinny arms
perfectly bare.
August 17.—We procured a canoe sufficiently large to carry all our
baggage, (we had hitherto had two,) with eight peons. We found
hills now on both sides of the river, which a little below Lupuna has
one hundred and twenty yards of breadth and thirty feet of depth. We
passed a small raft, with a house built of cane and palm upon it, con-
taining an image of the Virgin, which was bound up the river seeking
contributions. The people buy a step towards Heaven in this way with
their little balls of cotton. ;
We passed abreast of Juan Juy; but, a long island intervening, we
did not see it. It is a large village of five hundred inhabitants ; it is
situated in a plain, a great part of which is overflowed by the river at
the full; and much rice is cultivated there. I have met with the rice
of. Juan Juy everywhere on the river. Soon after we passed the mouth
of the river Sapo, which is fifty yards broad, and muddy; navigable for
large canoes for twenty miles to the town of Saposoa, which contains one
thousand inhabitants, and is the capital of the comparatively populous
district of that name.
The Huallaga, which for some miles above this has but six feet of
water, at this place has eighteen; but it soon diminishes to six again.
We stopped at a collection of three or four huts called Oge, where
there was a trapiche to grind sugar-cane; but the people only made bad
rum of it. We tried to purchase yuccas and plantains; but though
they had them, they did not care to sell. They only plant enough for
‘their own necessities. Great quantities of yuccas are used to make
their masato. Below this we passed a rancho on the right-hand side,
where there was a fine field of maize. This is the first settlement we
have seen on that bank; fear of the savages, (or Jnfidels,) as they are
called, who dwell on that side, preventing it.
We stopped for the night at Juan Comas, a small village situated on
a bluff of light sandy soil, on the left bank. The hills on the other
side are much more bare than is common, having only a few small trees
and scattering bushes on them. We were quite objects of curiosity,
and most of the people of the village came in to see us; one man, a
154 KIDNAPPING.
strapping fellow, came in, and after a brief but courteous salutation to
me, turned to one of the women, and drove her out of the house with
kicks and curses. He followed her, and I soon after heard the sound of
blows and the cries of a woman; I suppose the fellow was either jealousy
or the lady had neglected some household duty to gratify her curiosity.
August 18.—Just below Juan Comas the river has one hundred yards
of width and forty-two feet of depth. This part of the river is called
the “ well” of Juan Comas; it is half a mile in length, and the current
runs but one and a quarter mile the hour. The hills terminate just
below this, and we have the country flat on both sides. We passed
some rocky hills on the right-hand side, in one of which is a cave called
“ Puma-huasi,” or Tiger house. It is said to be very extensive. Soon
after we passed the mouth of the river Hunanza, a small stream coming
in on the Infidel side of the river. Our popero says that the Infidels
dwell near here, and the people of Tarapoto go a short distance up this
river to capture the young Indians and take them home as slaves. I
believe this story; for I found servants of this class in Tarapoto, who
were bought and sold as slaves. Slavery is prohibited by the laws of
Peru; but this system is tolerated on the plea that the Infidel is chris-
tianized and his condition bettered by it.
It is very easy for only a few white men, armed with guns, to rob
the savages of their children; for these rarely live in villages, but in
families of at most three or four huts, and widely separated from each.
other. They never assemble except for the purpose of war; and then
the sound of a horn, from settlement to settlement, brings them to-
gether. They are also a timid people, and will not face the white
man’s gun.
It is possible that the story of the popero is not true, and that the
whites may buy the children of the Indians; but if so, I imagine that
the advantages of the bargain are all on one side.
Below the mouth of.the Hunanza we have the same comparatively
bare hills that I noticed opposite Juan Comas. They present ridges of
red earth and dark stone, which curve from the south towards the
_ northeast, and are elevated in that direction to about 20°. I suspect
that they have veins of salt, particularly as the salt hills of Pilluana
are of the same range, and present at a distance nearly the same
appearance.
The hills of Pilluana, which we now soon passed, have their base
immediately upon the river, on the right-hand side. They are about
three hundred feet in height, and stretch along the banks of the river
for a quarter of a mile. The salt shows like frost upon the red earth at
SALT HILLS. 155
a distance; but seen nearer the heavy rains seem to have washed away
the loose earth and left nearly the pure salt standing in innumerable
cone-shaped pinnacles, so that the broken sides of the hills look like
what drawings represent of the crater of a volcano, or the bottom of a
geyser. Where the hills have been excavated, beautiful stalactites of
perfectly pure salt hang from the roof in many varieties of shapes.
There are much higher hills back of these, that appear also to cantain
salt; so that there seems a supply here for all people and for all time,
‘We passed the mouth of the river Mayo, that comes in on the left
between moderately high hills, and five minutes after arrived at Shapaja,
one of the ports of Tarapoto. The river, just above the junction of the
Mayo, narrows to forty yards, has thirty and thirty-six feet of depth,
and increases much in velocity. This is preparatory to its rush over
the “ Pongo,” a strait of forty-five miles in length, where the river is
confined between high hills, is much broken with malos pasos, and has
its last considerable declivity.
Shapaja has twenty houses, mostly concealed in the high groves of
plantains which surround them. Nearly all the men were away fishing,
but the women (as always) received us kindly, and cooked our supper
for us.
THE RIVER NEGRO. 275
streams, about four hundred miles; there the rapids commence, and
the further ascent must be made in boats. Though large vessels may
not ascend these rapids, they descend without difficulty. Most of the
vessels that ply both on the Rio Negro and Oronoco are built at or
near San Carlos, the frontier port of Venezuela, situated above the
rapids of the Negro, and are sent down those rapids, and also up the
Cassiquiari and down the Oronoco to Angostura, passing the two great
rapids of Atures and Maypures, where that river turns from its westerly
course toward the north. They cannot again ascend these rapids.
Antonii has a new vessel lying at Barra, built at San Carlos; it is one
hundred tons burden, and is well constructed, except that the decks,
being laid of green wood, have warped, and require to be renewed. It
cost him one thousand dollars. Brazilians pay a tax of fifteen per cent.
on prime cost on foreign-built vessels. Foreigners not naturalized cannot
sail vessels in their own name upon the interior waters of the empire.
It takes fifty-one days to go from Barra, at the mouth of the Negro,
to San Fernando, on the Oronoco. This is by ascending the Negro
above the mouth of the Cassiquiari, taking the cafio of Pimichim and
a portage of six hours to the headwaters of a small stream called
Atabapo, which empties into the Oronoco, A small boat may be
dragged over this portage in a day; to go between the same places by
the Cassiquiari requires ten days more at the most favorable season, and
twenty when the Oronoco is full.
From the journal of a voyage made by Antonii in the months of
April, May, and June, 1844, it appears that from Barra to Airao is five
days; thence to the mouth of Rio Branco, four; to Barcellos, three ;
to Moreira, three; to Thomar, two; to San Isabel, five; to Rio Maraia,
three; to Castanheiro, two; to Masarabi, one; to San Gabriel, six; to
Santa Barbara, one; to Sta. Ana, one; to N.S. de Guia, one; to Mabé,
one; to Sta, Marcellina, one; to Maribitano, one; to Marcellera, one;
to San Carlos, two; to Tiriquim, one; to Tomo, two; to Mardo, one;
to Pimichim, one; to Javita, one; to Baltazar, one; to San Fernando,
one,
A few hours above Barcellos is the mouth of the river Quiuni, which
is known to run up to within a very short distance of the Japura;
nearly opposite to San Isabel is the mouth of a river called Jurubashea,
which also runs up nearly to the Japura. Between these rivers is the
great Puxiri country; it is covered with water when the rivers are full.
There is a vagabond tribe of Indians living in this country called Magu.
They use no canoes, and when they cannot travel on the land, for the
depth of water, they are said to make astonishing progress from tree to
276 COMMUNICATION WITH THE ORONOCO.
tree, like monkeys; the men laden with their arms and the women with
their children.
Just above San Isabel are found great quantities of the Brazil nut;
and a little further up is the mouth of the river Cababuri, where sarsapa-
rilla, estimated at Pard as being better in quality than that of any other
in the valley of the Amazon, is gathered; still higher up, above San
Carlos, is cocoa of very superior quality, and in great abundance.
I have estimated that the distance between Barra and San Carlos at
the mouth of the Cassiquiari is about six hundred and sixty miles. A
flat-bottomed iron steamer calculated to pass the rapids of the Rio
Negro will make seventy-five miles a day against the current. This
will take her to San Carlos in nine days. She will ascend the Cassi-
quiari one hundred and eighty miles in two and a half days. From the
junction of the Cassiquiari and the Oronoco to Angostura is seven hun-
dred and eighty miles. The steamer has the current with her, and,
instead of seventy-five, will run one hundred and twenty-five miles a
day. This will bring her to Angostura in six days; thence to the ocean,
two hundred and fifty miles, in two days. This allows the steamer
abundance of time to take in fuel, and to discharge and take in cargo,
at the many villages she finds on her route; with a canal cut over the
portage of six hours at Pimichim, she will make the voyage in five days
less, Thus by the natural canal of the Cassiquiari the voyage between
Barra, at the mouth of the Negro, and the mouth of the Oronoco, may
be made by steam in nineteen and a half days; by the canal at Pimi-
chim in fourteen and a half days.
T shall have occasion hereafter to speak of the portage between the
river Tapajos (one of the southern confluents of the Amazon) and the
headwaters of the io dela Plata. This gives another immense inland
navigation.
The mind is confused with the great images presented to it by the
contemplation of these things. We have here a continent divided
into many islands, (for most of its great streams inosculate,) whose
shores produce, or may be made to produce, all that the earth gives for
the maintenance of more people than the earth now holds. We have
also here a fluvial navigation for large vessels, by the Amazon and its
great tributaries, of (in round numbers) about six thousand miles, which
does not include the innumerable small streams that empty into the
Amazon, and which would probably swell the amount to ten thousand ;
neither does it include the Oronoco, with its tributaries, on the one
hand, nor the La Plata, with its tributaries, upon the other; the former
of which communicates with the valley of the Amazon by the Cassi-
COMMUNICATION WITH THE ORONOCO. 277
quiari, and the latter merely requires a canal of six leagues in length,
over very practicable ground, to do the same.
Let us now suppose the banks of these streams settled by an active
and industrious population, desirous to exchange tha rich products of
their Jands for the commodities and luxuries of foreign countries; let
us suppose introduced into such a country the railroad and the steam-
boat, the plough, the axe, and the hoe; let us suppose the land divided
into large estates, and cultivated by slave labor, so as to produce all
that they are capable of producing: and with these considerations, we
shall have no difficulty in coming to the conclusion that no territory on
the face of the globe is so favorably situated, and that, if trade there
is once awakened, the power, the wealth, and grandeur of ancient
Babylon and modern Londen must yield to that of the depots of this
trade, that shall be established at the mouths of the Oronoco, the Ama-
zon, and the La Plata.
Humboldt, by far the greatest cosmographer that the world has yet
known, and one of the most learned men and profoundest thinkers of
any time, in contemplating the connexion between the valleys of the
Oronoco and the Amazon by the Cassiquiari, speaks thus of its future
importance :
“Since my departure from the banks of the Oronoco and the Ama-
zon, a new era unfolds itself in the social state of the nations of the
West. The fury of civil discussions will be succeeded by the blessings
of peace and a freer development of the arts of industry. The bifurca-
tion of the Oronoco,” (the Cassiquiari,) “the isthmus of Tuamini,” (my
portage of Pimichim,) “so easy to pass over by an artificial canal, will
fix the attention of commercial Europe. The Cassiquiari—as broad as
the Rhine, and the course of which is one hundred and eighty miles in
length—will no longer form in vain a navigable canal between two
basins of rivers, which have a surface of one hundred and ninety thou-
sand square leagues. The grain of New Grenada will be carried to the
- banks of the Rio Negro; boats will descend from the sources of the
Napo and the Ucayali, from the Andes of Quito and upper Peru, to
the mouths of the Oronoco—a distance which equals that from Timbuc-
too to Marseilles. A country nine or ten times larger than Spain, and
enriched with the most varied productions, is navigable in every direc-
tion by the medium of the natural canal of the Cassiquiari and the bi-
fureation of the rivers. This phenomenon, which one day will be so
important for the politieal connexions of nations, unquestionably deserves
to be carefully examined.”
If these things should, in the estimation of Humboldt, “ fix the atten-
°
278° THE PURUS.
tion of commercial Europe,” much more should they occupy ours. A
glance at the map, and a reflection upon the course of the trade-winds,
will show conclusively that no ships can sail from the mouths of the
Amazon and Oronoco without passing close by our southern ports.
Here, then, is the natural depot for the rich and varied productions of
that vast region. Here, too, can be found all that the inhabitants of
that region require for their support and comfort; and I have not the
slightest doubt, if Brazil should pursue a manly policy, and throw open
her great river to the trade of the world, that the United States would
reap far the largest share of the benefits to be derived from it.
Whilst at Barra, I had conversations with a man who had made
several trading voyages up the “Purus.” Ever since I had read the
pamphlet of Father Bobo de Revello, in which he attempts to show
that a navigable river, which he saw to the eastward of Cuzco, and
which he calls Madre de Dios, is identical with the Purus, this river
has had for me a great interest. I sent Mr. Gibbon to look for its
head-waters, and J determined, if possible, to ascend it from its mouth.
Iam not aware of the reasons which induced Gibbon to abandon the
search for its sources, though I suspect they arose from the well-known
fierce and hostile character of the savages who dwell on its upper banks.
But, for myself, I am compelled to acknowledge that when I arrived at
Barra, near the mouth of the Purus, I was broken down, and felt con-
vinced that I could not stand the hardship and exposure necessary for a
thorough examination of this river.
According to the statements of my informant—a very dark Brazilian,
named Seraphim—the Purus commences to rise in October, and to fall
in May. The best time to ascend it is when the river is quite full and
done rising—in May. The beaches are then covered, and slack water
is found close in to the proper shores of the river.
Fifteen days, or about two hundred and fifty miles from the mouth, is
the mouth of a stream called Parana-pishuna, which, by a succession
of lakes and a portage of a day, connects the Purus with the Madeira:
The connexion is only passable when the river is full. About the mouth
of this stream, the sezoens, or intermittent fevers, are said to be very
fatal; but a few days of navigation takes the voyager above their locality
and out of their influence. There are several large lakes between the
mouth of the Purus and that of the Parana-pishuna.
Thirty days from the mouth of the Purus is the mouth of a river
called the Afucuin, which also communicates with the Madeira, above
the rapids of that river. The banks of the Mucuin are low and level;
the river is shallow, and the rocks make the passage up and down tedious
286 MR. M’CULLOCH.
T am now sorry, as I came direct, that I did not give the required receipt
in return for the kindness that had been shown me.
Mr. Potter, the daguerreotypist and watchmaker, sailed in company
with me. We found the current of the “Negro” so slight that, with
. our heavy boat and few men, we could make no way against a smart
breeze blowing up the river: we, therefore, a mile or two below Barra,
pulled into the shore and made fast till the wind should fall, which it
did about 3 p. m., when we got under way and entered the Amazon.
Entering this river from the Negro, it appears but a tributary of the
latter, and it is generally so designated in Barra. Ifa fisherman just in
is asked where he is from, he will say “from the mouth of the Soli-
moens.” It has this appearance from the Negro’s flowing in a straight
course; while the Solimoens makes a great bend at the junction of the
two rivers. ,
It is very curious to see the black water of the Negro appearing in
large circular patches, amid the muddy waters of the Amazon, and en-
tirely distinct. I did not observe that the water of the Amazon was at
all clearer after the junction of the Negro; indeed, I thought it appeared
more filthy. We found one hundred and ninety-eight feet of depth in
the bay or large open space formed by the junction of the two rivers.
About sixty miles below the mouth of the Rio Negro we stopped at
the establishment of a Scotchman, named McCulloch, situated on the
left bank of the river. There is a very large island opposite, which
reduces the river in front to about one hundred yards in width; so that
the establishment seems to be situated on a creck.
McCulloch, in partnership with Antonii, at Barra, is establishing here
a sugar plantation, and a mill to grind the cane. He dams, at great
cost of time and labor, a creek that connects a small lake with the
river. He will only be able to grind about six months in the year,
when the river is falling and the water runs from the lake into the
river; but he proposes to grind with oxen when the river is rising. The
difference between high and low-water mark in the Amazon at this
point is, by actual measurement of McCulloch, forty-two feet. He works
with five or six hands, whom he pays a cruzado, or a quarter of a dollar
each, per day. There is a much greater scarcity of tapuios now than
formerly. Antonii, who used always to have fifty in his employ, cannot
now get more than ten.
McCulloch has already planted more than thirty acres of sugar-cane
on a hill eighty or one hundred feet above the present level of the river.
It seems of tolerable quality, but much overrun with weeds, on account
of want of hands. I gave hima leaf from my experience, and advised
SAW MILL. 287
him to set fire to his field after every cutting. The soil is black and
rich-looking, though light; and McCulloch supposes that in such soil
his cane will not require replanting for twenty years. The cane is
planted in December, and is ready to cut in ten months.
This is the man who, in partnership with the Brazilian, built the saw-
mill at Barra, which was afterwards burned down. He sawed one hun-
dred and thirty thousand feet the first year, but not more than half that
quantity the second; in the third, by making a contract with An-
tonii, who was to furnish the wood and receive half the profits, he sawed
eighty thousand. This plank is sold in Para at forty dollars the thou-
sand; but the expenses of getting it there, and other charges, reduce it
to about twenty-eight dollars. The only wood sawed is the cedro; not
that it is so valuable as other kinds, but because it is the only wood of
any value that floats; and thus can be brought to the mills. There are
no roads or means of hauling timber through the forests. McCulloch told
‘me that a young American, in Para, offered to join him in the erection
of a saw-mill, and to advance ten thousand dollars towards the enterprise.
He said that he now thought he was unwise to refuse it, for with that
sum he could have purchased a small steamer (besides building and
fitting the mill) with which to cruise on the river, picking up the cedros
and taking them to the mill.
These are not our cedars, but a tall, branching tree, with leaves more
like our oak. There are two kinds—red and white; the former of which
is most appreciated. Some of them grow to be of great size; between
Serpa and Villa Nova we made our boat fast to one that was floating
on the river, which measured in length from the swell of the root to
that of the first branches (that is a clear, nearly cylindrical trunk) ninety-
three feet, and was nineteen feet in circumference just above the swell
of the roots, which would probably have been eight feet from the ground
when the tree was standing.
McCulloch gave me some castanhas in the shell, and some roots of a
cane-like plant that grows in bunches, with very long, narrow leaves, and
bears a delicate and fragrant white flower, that is called, from its resem-
blance in shape to a butterfly, borboleta.
The distance hence to the méuth of the Madeira is about thirty miles,
After passing the end of the long island, called Tamétari, that lies oppo-
site McCulloch’s, we had to cross the river, which there is about two
miles wide. The shores are low on either hand, and well wooded with
apparently small trees. I always felt some anxiety in crossing so large
an expanse of water in such a boat as ours, where violent storms of wind
are of frequent occurrence. Our men, with their light paddles, could
288 MOUTH OF THE MADEIRA.
not keep such a haystack as our clumsy, heavy boat either head to
wind or before it, and she would, therefore, lie broadside to in the trough
of the sea, rolling fearfully, and threatening to swamp. I should have
had sails fitted to her in Barra.
After crossing the river, we passed the mouth of two considerable
streams. The lower one, called Uauta, is two hundred yards wide at
its mouth, and has a considerable current. It is said to have a large
lake near its headwaters, with outlets from this lake, communicating
with the Amazon above, and also with the Madeira; that is, it is a
paranamui of the Amazon, widening into a lake at some part of its
course. At half-past 8 p.m. we made fast for the night to some bushes
on the low, western bank of the Madeira.
A large island occupies the middle of the Amazon, opposite the
mouth of the Madeira. This mouth is also divided by a small island.
The western mouth, up which I pulled nearly to the head of the island,
(a distance of about a mile,) is three-quarters of a mile wide, with sixty-
six feet of depth, and a bottom of fine white and black sand. The
current runs at the rate of three and a quarter miles the hour. This
current, like that of all the rivers, varies very much, according to the
season. I was told afterwards, in Obidos, that, when the river was low—
in the months of August, September, and October—there was very
little current, and that a vessel might reach Borba from the mouth in
three days; but that, when it is full and falling—in the months of
March, April, and May—there is no tributary of the Amazon with so
strong a current; and then it requires twenty days to reach Borba.
The eastern mouth is a mile and a quarter wide. The island which
divides the mouth, is low and grassy at its outer extremity, but high
and wooded at its upper. I looked long and earnestly for the broad Z
that Gibbon was to cut on a tree at the mouth of whatever tributary
he should come down, in hopes that he had already come down the
Madeira, and, not being able to go up stream to Barra, had gone on
down; but it was nowhere to be seen,
The Madeira is by far the largest tributary of the Amazon. Once
past its cascades, which are about four hundred and fifty miles from its
mouth, and occupy a space of three huiidred and fifty miles in length,
it is navigable for large vessels by its great tributaries—the Beni and
Mamoré—into the heart of Bolivia; and by the Guaporé or Itenes, quite
through the rich Brazilian province of Matto Grosso. The Portuguese
astronomers, charged with the investigation of the frontiers, estimate
that it drains a surface equal to forty-four thousand square leagues.
We shall, however, know more of this river on the arrival of Mr. Gib-
SERPA. 289
bon, whom last accounts left at Trinidad de Moxos, on the Mamoré, one
of the tributaries of this great stream.
The rapids of the Madeira are not impassable; Palacios, the Brazilian
officer before quoted, descended and ascended them in a canoe, though
he had occasionally to drag the canoe over portages. And Mr. Clay,
our chargé at Lima, was told that a Brazilian schooner-of-war had
asffnded the Madeira above the rapids, and fired a salute at Hzaltacion,
which is in Bolivia, above the junction of the Beni. Palacios probably
descended at low water, and the schooner went up when the river was
full.
The village of Serpa, where we arrived in the afternoon, is situated
on the left bank of the Amazon, thirty miles below the mouth of the
Madeira. It is a collection of mud-hovels of about two hundred souls,
built upon a considerable eminence, broken and green with grass, that
juts out into the river. There is a point of land just above Serpa, on
the opposite side, which, throwing the current off, directs it upon the
Serpa point, and makes a strong eddy current for half'a mile above the
town close in shore.
_Serpa has a considerable lake back of it called Saracd, on the lewer
end of which is the village of Silves, a little larger than Serpa. That
entrance to the lake which communicates with the Amazon near Serpa
isnot large enough for my boat to enter; that near Silves will admit
large schooners. A mark on a tree shows that the river rises about
twelve feet above its present level.
We left Serpa at 6 p.m., and drifted all night. We are compelled
to travel at night, for there is so much wind and sea during the day
that we make no headway. We are frequently compelled to lay by,
and are sometimes in danger of being swamped, even in the little nooks
and bays where we stop. The most comfortable way of travelling is to
make the boat fast to a floating tree, for this keeps the boat head on to
the wind and sea, and drags her along against these with the velocity .
of the current.
About fifteen miles above Villa Nova, which is one hundred and fifty
miles below Serpa, a boat manned by soldiers pulled out from a hut on
the shore, and told us we must stop there until examined and despatched
by the officer in charge, called inspector. I could not well pull back
against the stream, for we had already passed the hut; so I sent word
to the inspector that I had letters from the President, and pulled in
shore abreast of where I was. The inspector had the civility to come
down to me and inspect my papers. This is a “resisto,” or coast-guard,
stationed above the port of entry of Villa Nova, to stop vessels from
19
290 VILLA NOVA.
passing, and to notify them that they must go into that port. There is
another below Villa Nova, to stop vessels coming up, and to examine
the clearances from the custom-house of those coming down.
Within a quarter of a mile from the shore I found one hundred and
twenty feet of depth, and three miles the hour of current. The current
of the Amazon has increased considerably since the junction of the
Madeira.
The inspector told me I was within four hours of Villa Nova; but I
kept in shore, for fear of squalls; and thus, in the darkness of night,
pulled around the shore of a deep bay, where there was little current,
and did not arrive for eight hours, passing the mouth of the small river
Limad, about a mile and a half above Villa Nova, where we arrived at
2 a.m.
Villa Nova de Rainha is a long straggling village of single story
mud-huts, situated in a little bend on the right bank of the Amazon.
The temperature of boiling water gives its elevation above the level of
the sea at nine hundred and fifty-nine feet. It contains about two hun-
dred inhabitants, and the district to which it belongs—embracing several
small villages in the interior, with cocoa plantations on the banks of
the river—numbers four or five thousand. The productions of the dis-
trict are cocoa, coffee, and a few cattle, but principally salt fish. The
whole country back of the village is vey much cut up by lakes, (with
water communications between them,) where the greater part of the fish
is taken. The sub-delegado gave me a sketch of it from his own per-
sonal knowledge and observation.
This being the frontier town of the province of Amazonas, there is a
custom-house established here. I heard that it had collected one thou-
sand dollars since the steamer passed up in December. This gives an
indication of the trade of the country; foreign articles, which are the
cargoes of vessels bound up, paying one and a half per cent. on their
value; and articles of domestic produce, which the vessels bound down
carry, paying a half per cent. The collection of one thousand dollars
was made in two months,
The people valued their fowls at fifty cents apiece. We thought them
extortionate, and would not buy; but we happened to arrive on fresh-
beef day, and got a soup-piece. These fresh-meat days are a week
apart, though this is a cattle producing country. It is an indication of
the listless indifference of the people.
Just before reaching Villa Nova, my sounding-lead had hung in the
rocks at the bottom, and a new piassaba line, which I had made in
Barra, of about the size of a common log. or cod-line, parted as if it
MAUES. 291
had been pack-thread. I bought another lead at the village; this also
hung at the first cast, and the line again parted close to my hand, so
that I lost nearly all. My line must have been made of old fibres of
the piassaba which had been in store some time. The bottom of the
river near Villa Nova is very uneven and rocky.
About a league below Villa Nova we passed the mouth of the river
Ramos on the right. It istwo hundred yards wide, and is a paranimiri,
which leaves the Amazon nearly opposite Silves. It has many small
streams emptying into itin the interior, and sends off canals, joining it
with other rivers, one of which is the Madeira. It is the general route
to Maués—a considerable village in the interior, four days from the
mouth of the Ramos.
The country about Mavwés is described as a great grazing plain, inter-
sected and cut up with streams and canals, all navigable for the largest
class of vessels that now navigate the Amazon. The soil is very rich,
and adapted to the cultivation of cotton, coffee, and cocoa. The rivers
give abundance of fish; any number of cattle may be pastured upon
the plains; and the neighboring woods yield cloves, cocoa, castanhas,
India-rubber, guarana, sarsaparilla, and copaiba. If this country be not
sickly (and the sub-delegado at Villa Nova, who gave mea little sketch
of it, told me that it was not) it is probably the most desirable place of
residence on the Amazon.
Baéna, in his chorographic essay on the province of Para, says of
Maués, that it is situated upon a slight eminence on a bay of the river
Mauéuassu, which empties into the Furo, or canal of Ururaia, by means
of which, and the river Tupinambaranas, one may enter the river Madeira
thirteen leagues above its mouth. He gives the number of inhabitants
in 1832 at one thousand six hundred and twenty-seven. The official
report for 1850 states it at three thousand seven hundred and nine
whites, and eighty-two slaves. This official report makes an ugly state-
ment as regards its health ; it gives the number of births in a year at
seventy-four, and deaths at one hundred and thirty-one. I have no
confidence in this statement, and it looks like a misprint. This report
stated the number of inhabited houses at Barra as one hundred and
seventy. This I knew was an error, and I took the liberty of making it
four hundred and seventy.
Just below the mouth of the Ramos, quite a neatly rigged boat, carry-
ing the Brazilian flag, put off from a house on shore, and seemed
desirous to communicate with us; but she was so badly managed that,
although there was a fine breeze, (directly ahead, however,) she could not
catch us, though we were but drifting with the current. Had I known
248 ‘ RIVER JAPURA.
lingness to work afterwards. The Ticunas that I had with me, however,
were far the laziest and most worthless people that I had hitherto had
anything to do with. I believe that this is not characteristic of the
tribe, for they seemed well enough under Father Flores at Caballo-cocha,
and they have generally rather a good reputation among the whites on
the river. I imagine that the proximity of the garrison at Tabatinga
has not a good effect upon their manners and morals; but, however
that may be, these men were too lazy to help to cook the provisions;
and when we stopped to breakfast they generally seated themselves on
the thwarts of the boat, or on the sand of the beach, whilst the Saraya-
quinos fetched the wood and made the fire. They were ready enough
to eat when the breakfast was cooked. I couldn’t stand this, when I
observed that it was a customary thing, and accordingly caused the
provisions issued to be divided between the two parties, and told my
Ticuna friends, “No cook, no eat.” It would take many years of saga-
cious treatment on the part of their rulers to civilize this people, if it be
possible to do so at all, i
December 15.—We travelled till 11 p. m., for want of a beach to
camp on; the men disliking to sleep in the woods on account of snakes.
- December 16.—Finding that I was on the southern bank, and having
an opening between two islands abreast of me, I struck off to the east-
ward for the mouth of the Japura. We ran through island passages
till we reached it at 3 p. m., distant one hundred and five miles from
the mouth of the Jurua.
The Japura has two mouths within a few hundred yards of each other.
The one to the westward is the largest, being about one hundred yards
wide. It is a pretty stream of clear, yellow water, with bold and abrupt,
though not high banks, (ten or fifteen feet.) I pulled up about half a
mile, and in mid-stream found fifty-seven feet of water, which shoaled to
the mouth to forty-two; the bottom soft mud to the touch; but the arming
of the lead brought up small quantities of black and white sand. There
was very little current—only three-fourths of a mile per hour. I thought
it might be affected by the rush of its greater neighbor, and that the
water so near the mouth was “back water” from the Amazon; but the
current was quite as great close to the mouth as it was half a mile up.
The temperature of the water, to my surprise, was 85°; that of the
Amazon, a quarter of an hour afterwards, was 81°. I had heard that, on
account of the gentleness of the current of the Japurd, a voyage of a
month up this river was equal in distance to two onthe Ica. A month
up the Japurd reaches the first impediment to navigation, where the
river breaks through hills called “As Serras das Araras,” or hills of the
INDIANS OF THE JAPURA. ; 249 |
macaws; and where the bed of the stream is choked with immense
rocks, which make it impassable even for a canoe. A gentleman at
Egas told me of an extraordinary blowing cave among these hills.
The Indians of the Japuré are called Mirauas, (a large tribe,) Curdtus,
and Macus. The traveller reaches them in sixteen days from the
mouth. The Macus have no houses, but wander in the woods; infest
the river banks ; and rob and kill when they can. (These are the fruits
of the old Brazilian system of hunting Indians to make slaves of them.)
The products of the Japura are the same as those of the Jurud ; and, in
addition, a little carajurii, a very brilliant scarlet dye, made of the leaves
of a bush called pucapanga in Peru. The Indians pack it in little bags
made of the inner bark of a tree, and sell at the rate of twenty-five
cents the pound. I am surprised that it has never found its way into
commerce. I think it of quite as brilliant and beautiful a color as
cochineal.
I judge the width of the Amazon, opposite the mouth of the Japura,
to be four or five miles. It is separated into several channels by two or
three islands. We camped at half past 6 p. m., on an island where
there was a hut and a patch of mandioc and Indian corn, but no people.
We had a clear night, (with the exception of a low belt of stratus clouds
around the horizon,) the first we have seen for more than a week.
December 17.—Started at 4. a.m. It was too dark to see the upper
point of an island between us and the southern shore till we had passed
it; so that we had to pull up for an hour against the current, so as to
pass the head of this island, and not fall below Egas. At half-past eight
we entered a narrow channel between a small island and the right bank,
which conducted us into the river of Teffé, about a mile inside of its
mouth. The river at this point is one hundred and eighty yards broad;
water clear and apparently deep. Just below Egas, where we arrived at
half-past ten, it expands into a lake; or, rather, the lake here contracts
into the river. The town is situated on a low point that stretches out
into the lake, and has a harbor on each side of it. The point rises into
a regular slope, covered with grass, to the woods behind. The lake is
shallow, and is sometimes, with the exception of two or three channels,
which have always six or eight feet of water in them, entirely dry from
Egas to Nogueyra, a small village on the opposite side.
On landing we showed our passports to the sub-delegado, an officer of
the general government who has charge of the police of the district, and
to the military commandant, and forthwith inducted ourselves into the
house of M. Fort, our French friend of Tabatinga, who had placed it at
our disposal,
.
250 . “EGAS.
CHAPTER XIII,
Egas—Trade—Lake Coari—Mouth of Rio Negro—Barra—Trade—Productions.
Egas has a population of about eight hundred inhabitants, and is the
largest and most thriving place above Barra. It occupies an important
position with regard to the trade of the river, being nearly midway be-
tween Barra and Loreto, (the Peruvian frontier,) and near the mouths
of the great rivers Jurud, Japurd, and Teffé.
There are now eight or ten commercial houses at Egas that drive a
tolerably brisk trade between Peru and Para, besides employing agents
to go into the neighboring rivers and collect from the Indians the pro-
ductions of the land and the water.
Trade is carried on in schooners of between thirty and forty tons bur- .
den, which commonly average five months in the round trip between
Egas and Para, a distance of fourteen hundred and fifty miles, with an
expense (consisting of pay and support of crew, with some small provin-
cial and church taxes) of about one hundred and fifty dollars. M. Cas-
telnau estimates these provincial and church taxes at about thirteen per
cent. on the whole trade. Here is the bill of lading of such a vessel
bound down: 150 arrobas of sarsaparilla: cost at Egas, $4 the arroba;
valued in Para at from $7 to $7 50. 300 pots manteiga: cost at Egas,
$1 40 the pot; value in Para, $2 50 to $3 50. 200 arrobas of salt fish:
cost at Egas, 50 cents the arroba; value in Pard, $1 to $1 25.
Thus it appears that the cargo, which cost at Egas about thirteen
hundred dollars, is sold in Para, in two months, for twenty-six hundred
dollars. The vessel then takes in a cargo of coarse foreign goods worth
there twenty-five hundred dollars, which ske sells, in three months, in
Egas, at twenty per cent. advance-on Para prices; making a profit of
six hundred and twenty-five dollars. This added to the thirteen hun-
dred of profit on the down trip, and deducting the one hundred and
fifty of expenses, will give a gain of seventeen hundred and seventy-five
dollars in five months, which is about two hundred and seventy-five dol-
lars more than the schooner costs.
There are five such vessels engaged in this trade, each making two
tripsa year; so that the value of the trade between Para and Egas
may be estimated at thirty-eight thousand dollars annually Between
184 COMMERCE.
Sarsaparilla is a vine of sufficient size to shoot up fifteen or twenty
feet from the root without support. It then embraces the surrounding
trees, and spreads to a great distance. The main root sends out many
tendrils, generally about two lines in diameter, and five feet long.
These are gathered and tied up in large bundles of about a Portuguese
arroba, or thirty-two pounds of weight. The main root, or madre,
should not be disturbed; but the Indians are little careful in this matter,
and frequently cut it off, by which much sarsaparilla is destroyed.
The digging up of the smail roots out of the wet and marshy soil is a
laborious and unhealthy occupation.
It is to be found on the banks of almost every tributary of the preat
streams of the Montafia; but a great many of these are not worked, on
account of the savages living on their banks, who frequently attack the
parties that come to gather it. On the “Pangoa” are the Campas; on
the “ Pachitea,” the “Aguaytia,” and the “ Pisque,” are the ‘“‘Cashibos;”
and the whole southern border of the Amazon, from the mouth of the
Ucayali to that of the Vavari, is inhabited by the “Mayorunas;” all
savages, and averse to intercourse with the white man. The same is
the case on the “Tigreyacu,” where there is said to be much sarsapa-
rilla. Padre Calvo, the president of the Missions at Sarayacu, told me
that, although he has the exclusive right, by order of the prefect, of
collecting all the sarsaparilla on the Ucayali and its tributaries, he could
not, if I were willing to pay any price, supply me with more than
three hundred arrobas per annum, on account of the difficulty of getting
laborers who are willing to brave the attacks of the savages. ‘
I have estimated the annual cost of running a small steamer be-
tween Loreto, the frontier port of Peru and Chasuta, a distance of eight
hundred miles, entirely within the Peruvian territory, at twenty thousand
dollars, including the establishment of blacksmiths’ and carpenters’ shops
at Nauta for her repairs. . According to the estimate of Arebalo, (and I
judge that he is very nearly correct,) the value of the imports’ and ex-
ports to and from Brazil is twenty thousand dollars annually. I have no
doubt that the appearance of a steamer in these waters would at once
double the value; for it would, in: the first place, convert the thousand
men who are now employed in the fetching and carrying of the articles
of trade into producers, and would give a great impulse to trade by
facilitating it. A loaded canoe takes eighty days to ascend these eight
hundred miles. A steamer will do it in twelve, giving ample time to
take in wood, to land and receive cargo at the various villages on the
river, and to lay by at night. When the river becomes better known _
she can run for a large part of the night, and thus shorten her time ©
COMMERCE. 185
nearly one-half. Men shrink at the eighty days in a canoe, when they
will jump at the twelve in a steamer.
The steamer will also increase commerce and trade by creating
artificial wants; men will travel who did not travel before; articles of
luxury—such as Yankee clocks, cheap musical instruments, &c.—will be
introduced, and the Indians will work to obtain them; and, in short,
‘when the wonders that the steamboat and railroad have accomplished
are taken into consideration, J shall not be thought rash in predicting
that in one year from the time of the appearance of the steamer,
Arebalo’s twenty thousand dollars will be made forty thousand.
Thus we shall have twenty thousand: dollars’ worth of goods going
up from Loreto to Chasuta, paying at least one hundred per cent.; and
twenty thousand dollars going down, paying another hundred per cent.;
giving to the steamboat company (who would monopolize the trade)
forty thousand dollars a year, against twenty thousand dollars of
expenses.
There would be no difficulty in getting a supply of fuel. My
Peruvian steamer would have to make her way slowly up, for the first
time, by collecting and cutting up the abundant drift-wood on the
islands ; but she could readily contract with the governors of the thirty-
six villages between Para and Chasuta for a regular supply. The
Brazilian government has an organized and enlisted corps of laborers,
under the orders of the military commandants, and I should suppose
would be willing to employ them in furnishing wood, on account of the
great advantages to be derived from the increase of trade. The Indians
of the Peruvian villages are entirely obedient to their governors; and
a sufficient number of them may always be had, at wages of twelve
and a half cents per day, with about three cents more for their main-
tenance. This amount of wages may be reduced one-half by paying
them in articles for their consumption, bought at Para or brought from
the United States.
The only difficulty that I have in my calculations is that I know
there are not forty thousand dollars in the whole province; its produc-
tions must find their way to the Pacific, on the one hand, and to the
Atlantic, on the other, before they can be converted into money. My
steamer, therefore, to be enabled to buy and sell, must communicate
at Loreto with a larger steamer, plying between that place and Barra,
at the mouth of the Rio Negro, a distance of eight hundred and forty
miles; and this with another still larger, between Barra and Para, a
distance of a thousand miles.
These three steamers (however much I may be out of my calculations
186- COMMERCE.
regarding the one conbitea i the Peruvian territory (could not fail to
enrich their owners; for they would entirely monopolize the trade of
the river, which is pally measured by the imports and exports of Para,
which amounted in 1851 to two millions of dollars.
These two millions are now brought down to Para, and carried away
from Para, (with the exception of what is consumed in the city,) by
clumsy, inefficient river-craft, which would vanish from the main stream
at the first triumphant whistle of the engine. These would, however,
until the profits justified the putting on of more steamers, find ample
employment in bringing down and depositing upon the banks of the
main stream the productions of the great tributaries.
T can imagine the waking-up of the people on the event of the estab-
lishment of steamboat navigation on the Amazon. I fancy I can hear
the crash of the forest falling to make room for the cultivation of cotton,
cocoa, rice, aud sugar, and the sharp shriek of the saw, cutting into
boards the beautiful and valuable woods of the country; that I can see
the gatherers of India-rubber and copaiba redoubling their efforts, to be
enabled to purchase the new and convenient things that shall be pre-
sented at the door of their huts in the wilderness; and even the wild
Indian finding the way from his pathless forest tothe steamboat depot
to exchange his collections of vanilla, spices, dyes, drugs, and gums, for
the things tht would take his fancy—ribbons, beads, bells, mirrors, and
gay trinkets.
Brazil and Peru have entered into arrangements, and bound them-
selves by treaty, to appropriate money towards the establishment of
steamboat navigation on the Amazon. This is well. It is doing some-
thing towards progress; but it is the progress of a denizen of their own
forests—the sloth. Were they to follow the example lately set by the
republics of the La Plata, and throw open their rivers to the commerce
of the world, then the march of improvement would be commensurate
with the importance of the act; and these countries would grow in
riches and power with the rapidity of the vegetation of their own most
fertile lands.
We, more than any other people, are interested in the opening of this
navigation. As has been before stated, the trade of this region must
pass by our doors, and mingle and exchange with the products of our
Mississippi valley. Iam permitted to take extracts bearing upon this
subject from a letter of an eminent American citizen residing in Lima
to the Superintendent of the National Observatory, whose papers upon
the Amazon, its resources and future importance, have attracted the
attention, not only of our own people, but that of those who dwell or
NAVIGATION. : 187
have territorial possessions upon this great water-shed; and to whom
belongs the honor of originating the mission upon which I have been
engaged.
This gentleman in Lima, whose comprehensive mind and ripe judg-
ment had been attracted to the subject by Maury’s pen, says to the
Lieutenant, under date of July, 1852:
“Since I last wrote to you, I have made the acquaintance of Don
,-a native of Chili, and whom Gibbon saw at Cochabamba, in
Bolivia. This is undoubtedly a clever man; but I suspect that he has
also come to act as a secret agent of Belzu, the President of Bolivia.
However that may be, he pretends that Belzu is favorably disposed
towards us, and would grant privileges to a steam navigation company,
were application made to him in due form. As I know of no other
individual in Bolivia with whom I could communicate on the subject
of Amazonian navigation, I did not hesitate to make use of him; for,
in my opinion, there is no time to be lost if the United States intend ’
to secure the interior trade of South America for its citizens.
“Don declares that the Mamoré is navigable for steamers from
a point near Cochabamba to its confluence with the Guaporé or Itenez,
and so onward to the junction of the latter with the Beni, forming
together the Rio Madeira; that the ‘Cachuelas,’ or falls of the Madeira,
are neither impassable nor formidable, and may be easily ascended by
steamers, as there is plenty of water and no rocks. To prove this, he
~ asserts that a Brazilian schooner ascended the Mamoré to Trinidad, and
fired a salute at that place, about two years ago. After passing the
falls, the river is, of course, navigable to the Amazon. Admitting this
statement of Don to be true, (and I am inclined to believe it,
as the Brazilians constantly ascend the Itenez to Matto Grosso,) there
is open navigation from Para to within a few leagues of Cochabamba,
at least two thousand miles; and this is not so incredible when we con-
sider the length of navigation on the Missouri river. The accessibility
of the Bolivian rivers will, however, be ascertained with greater certainty
after Gibbon has passed through the Cachuelas of the Madeira, as it is
to be hoped that he will sound, and otherwise minutely examine, the
Alifferent rapids of that river, and correct the errors which Don
says are in the chart made by , a copy of which I sent you by
“The account Don gives of the products of the country
lying on the banks of the Mamoré is very glowing. He says that the
richest cocoa and coffee grow almost wild, and that the greatest part of
the former is consumed by the monkeys and birds, for the want of means
188 . PRODUCTIONS.
of transporting it to a market. Sugar-cane of gigantic dimensions is
found everywhere, with white and yellow cotton of a staple equal to Sea
island. Several kinds of cascarilla grow in abundance, as also sarsapa-
rilla and gums, ornamental and other woods, and honey and wax, in
immense quantities. Crossing the Mamoré from Exaltacion to the
southwest, you arrive at the river Machuno, which, according to Don
, is a small ‘Pactolus;’ and he assures me that the whole coun-
try between the Mamoré and the Itenez, from latitude 14° to the north,
is a gold district as rich as California.
“My opinion decidedly is, that the whole country traversed by Ph:
rivers issuing from the slope of the Eastern Cordillera, from Santa Cruz
de la Sierra, in Bolivia, to the mouth of the Ucayali, in Peru, is one
immense gold and silver region; gold being found in the flats near the
rivers, and silver in the mountains. I will venture to predict that the
same region contains diamonds and other precious stones, some of which
- are probably unknown to the lapidary at present. The silver mines of
Carabaya were immensely productive when worked by Salcedo; so
much so, that the vice-regal government trumped up an accusation
against him, tried him, and ordered his execution, to obtain possession
of the mines by confiscation, The attempt failed, as the Indians, who
were devoted to Salcedo, refused to give any information to the govern-
ment respecting the mines; and, they have remained unworked up to
the present time.
“Gold is known to exist in considerable quantities at Carabaya, andi in,
* the Pampa del Sacramento. I have seen specimens from the former
place; but gold is the least attraction for emigration to Bolivia; the soil
and its produets are the source from which the wanderers from foreign
lands are to find plenty and happiness. The climate is said to be good,
and the Indians, except upon the lower part of the Beni, peaceable and
well disposed to the whites. In short, according to Don -, the
east of Bolivia affords the greatest sphere for trade and colonization.
* * * x * * FS * * *
“For myself, I feel full of this vast subject; for I know that within
less than one hundred leagues of me is the margin of those great soli-
tudes: replete with riches, and occupying the wild space where millions |
of the human race might dwell in plenty and happiness; where nature
annually wastes more than would support the population of China in
comfort; and where the most luxurious fruits and fairest flowers grow and
bloom unknown and unnoticed. When I reflect on this, and on the
miles of rivers rolling on in silence and neglect, I feel doubly the want
&
FREE NAVIGATION. 189
of power and money to accomplish their introduction to the civilized
world.
* * 8 % % * % % * % %
“T think that the energies and influence of all the friends of South
American internal navigation and colonization should be directed
towards forming a company, with a large capital, and to obtain the aid
and support of the Congress of the United States. I know how difficult
an’ undertaking it is to wring an appropriation out of our national
legislature, for any purpose; but if the subjeet could be fairly brought
before it, and some of the leading senators and representatives could be
excited to take a patriotic interest in it, perhaps something might be
done.
“We must, on our side, do all we can, and by dint of perseverance
we may succeed at last in accomplishing our object. Should we do so,
it will be a proud satisfaction to ourselves ; though the public may, and
probably will, leave us to exclaim—
“ «Hos ego versiculos feci, tulit alter honores !’
“TJ shall continue working on and writing to you whenever I have
anything of the least interest to communicate.”
The greatest boon in the wide world of commerce is in the free navi-
gation of the Amazon, its confluents and neighboring streams. The
back-bone of South America is in sight of the Pacific. The slopes of
the continent look east; they are drained into the Atlantic, and their
rich productions, in vast variety and profusion, may be emptied into
the commercial lap of that ocean by the most majestic of water-courses.
‘The time will come when the free navigation of the Amazon and
other South American rivers will be regarded by the people of this
country as second only in importance to the acquisition of Louisiana.
Having traversed that water-shed from its highest ridge to its very
caves and gutters, I find my thoughts and reflections overwhelmed with
the immensity of this field for enterprise, commercial prosperity, and
human happiness.
I can bear witness to the truth of the sentiment expressed by my |
friend, Mr. Maury, that the Valley of the Amazon and the Valley of the
Besisippi are commercial complements of each other—one supplying
what the other lacks in the great commercial round. They are sisters
which should not be separated. Had I the honor to be mustered among
the statesmen of my country, I would risk political fame and life in the
attempt to have the commerce of this noble river thrown open to the
world.
190 NAUTA.
CHAPTER X.
Nauta—River Ucayali—Sarayacu—The Missionaries—The Indians of the Ucayali.
Senor Cauper has four or five slaves in his house—blacks, which he
brought from Brazil. This is contrary to the law, but it is winked at;
and I heard the governor say that he would like much to have a pair.
Mr. Cauper said they would be difficult to get, and would cost him five
hundred dollars in money. <A slave that is a mechanic is worth five
hundred dollars in Brazil.
Arebalo gave us specimens of the woods of the country ; they are
called aguano, ishpingo, muena, cupirono, cedro, palo de cruz, (our lig-
num-vite,) and palo de sangre—all good, whether for house or ship-
building; and some of them very hard, heavy, and beautiful. The palo
de sangre is of a rich red color, susceptible of a high polish; and a
deeoction of its bark is said to be good to stay bloody evacuations, I
had no opportunity of testing it, but suspect it is given on the homeo-
pathic principle, that “like cures like,” because it is red. I thought the
same of the guaco, in the case of the snake-bite. j
The temperature of Nauta is agreeable. The lowest thermometer I
observed was 71° at 6 a. m., and the highest 89° at 3 p.m. We have.
had a great deal of cloudy weather and rain since we have been on the
Amazon ; and it is now near the commencement of the rainy season.at
this place. No one suffers from heat, though this is probably the hot--
test season of the year; the air is loaded with moisture; and heavy
squalls of wind and rain sweep over the country almost every day. In
the dry months—from the last of February to the first of September—a
constant and heavy breeze blows, nearly all day, against the stream of
the river; the wind, at all seasons, is generally easterly, but is at this
time more fitful and liable to interruption ; so that sail-boats bound up
make, at this season, the longest passages. The river, which is three-
fourths of a mile wide opposite Nauta, and has an imposing appear-
ance, has risen four feet between thé sixteenth and twenty-fifth of —
tember.
The town is situated on a hill, with the forest well cleared away from
around it, and is a healthy place. I saw only two cases of sickness
during my stay of two weeks. They were acute cases of disease, to
which people are liable everywhere. Both patients died ; probably for
THE BOILING POINT. — 257
that they abandoned their families; but in my judgment this was a benefit
to them, rather than an injury, for the man at home is, in a great
measure, supported by the woman.
I could not make an estimate of the number of Peruvian Indians in
Brazil; but I noticed that most of the tapuios were Cocamas and
Cocamillas, from the upper Amazon.
We entered the Amazon at 4 p.m. The mouth of the Teffé is three
hundred yards wide, and has thirty feet of depth and one mile per hour
of current. This is an inconsiderable stream, and may be ascended by
canoes to near its sources in twenty days. In ten or twelve days’ ascent,
a branch called the Rio Gancho is reached, which communicates by a
portage with the Jurud. Indians of the Purus, also, sometimes descend
the Teffé to Egas.
I was surprised to find the temperature of boiling water at Egas to
be but 208°.2, the same within .2 of a degree that it was at a point
one day’s journey below Tingo Maria, which village is several hundred
miles above the last rapids of the Huallaga river ; at Sta, Cruz, two days
above the mouth of the Huallaga, it was 211°.2; at Nauta, three
hundred and five miles below this, it was 211°.3 ; at Pebas, one hundred
and seventy miles below Nauta, 211°.1. I was so much surprised at
these results that I had put the apparatus away, thinking that its indi-
cations were valueless ; but I was still more surprised, upon making the
experiment at Egas, to find that the temperature of the boiling water
had fallen three degrees below what it was at Sta. Cruz, thus giving to
Egas an altitude of fifteen hundred feet above that village, which is
situated more than a thousand miles up stream of it. I continued my
observations from Egas downwards, and found a regular increase in the
temperature of the boiling water until our arrival at Para, where it
was 211°.5. :
M. Castelnau gives the height of Nauta at four hundred and five feet
above the level of the sea; the temperature of boiling water gives it at
three hundred and fifty-six. Both these, I think, arein error; for, taking
off forty feet for the height of the hill on which Nauta is situated, we have
three hundred and sixty-five for the height of the river at that point
above the level of the sea. Now, that point I estimate at two thousand
three hundred and twenty-five miles from the sea, which would give the
river only a fall of about sixteen-hundredths of a foot per mile—a de-
scent which would scarcely give the river its average velocity of two
and a half miles per hour.
From an after-investigation, I am led to believe that the cause of this
phenomenon arises from the fact that the trade-winds are dammed
17
258 «LAKE COARI.
up by the Andes, and that the atmosphere in those parts is, from this
cause, compressed, and consequently heavier than it is farther from the
mountains, though over a less elevated portion of the earth. The
discovery of this fact has led me to place little reliance in the indica-
tions of the barometer for elevation at the eastern foot of the Andes.
It is reasonable, however, to suppose that this cause would no longer
operate at Egas, nearly one thousand miles below the mouth of the
Huallaga.
I shall, therefore, give the height of Egas above the level of the sea,
from the temperature of boiling water, (208°.2,) at two thousand and
fifty-two feet. Egas is about eighteen hundred miles from the sea; this
would give the river a descent of a little more than a foot per mile,
which would about give it its current of two and a half miles per hour.
December 29.—We drifted with the current, and a little paddling on
the part of the crew, until 10 p. m., when we made fast to a tree on the
right bank.
December 30.—We started at 5 a.m. At 3 p. m., where the
river was quite a mile wide, I found but thirty feet in mid-channel;
and about two hundred yards on our right hand was a patch of grass,
with trees grounded on it. At 6 p.m., [judged from the appearance
of the shores on each side (bold, red cliffs) that we had all the width of
the river. It was only about a mile wide, and I thought it would be
very deep; but I found only sixty feet. I could not try the current for
the violence of the wind. At seven we arrived at the mouth of the
Lake Coari, one hundred and fifteen miles from Egas, and made fast toa
’ schooner at anchor near the right bank.
This schooner seemed to have no particular owner or captain, but to
be manned by a company of adventurers; for all appeared on an equal-
ity. They were from Obidos, upwards of two months; and twenty-eight
days from Barra, which place we reached from here in five. They
were travelling at their leisure, but complained much of the strength of
the current and the want of strength of the easterly winds. I heard
the same complaints at Egas, but I have found the winds quite fresh
from the eastward, and the current, compared with that above, slight.
But there is a wonderful difference in the estimation of a current, or
the strength of a wind, when voyaging with and against them.
The fault of the vessels navigating the Amazon is the breadth of
beam and want of sail. I am confident that a clipper-built vessel,
sloop, or rather ketch-rigged, with a large mainsail, topsail, topgallant-
sail, and studding sails—the last three fitted to set going up before the
wind, and to strike, masts and all, so as to beat down with the current
e
LAKE COARI. ~ 259
under mainsail, jib, and jigger—would make good passages between
Para and Egas. The vessels used now on the river are built broad and
flat-bottomed, to warp along shore when the wind is light or contrary.
Their sails are much too small, and are generally made of thin, bad
material.
December 31.—We pulled into the Lake of Coari; but being told
that it would take nearly all day to reach the village of Coari, and that
it was an insignificant place, where I would get neither supplies nor in-
_ formation, I decided not to go.
It may seem strange that just out of Egas I should need supplies, but
all I could purchase there were half a dozen fowls, four turtles, and
some farinha; and upon opening the baskets of farinha, it was found
to be so old and sour that, though the Indians could eat it, I could not;
and thus we had no bread, nor even the substitute for it—plantains and
farinha; and had to eat our meat with some dried peas that we fortu-
nately found at Egas.
The entrance to the Lake of Coari is about four hundred yards
wide, and half a mile long. It expands, particularly on the right hand,
suddenly into the lake, which at once shows itself six or seven miles
wide, having a large island extending apparently nearly across it.
The entrance has forty-two feet of depth in the middle, and, being
faced by an island at both mouths, (the one into the lake, the other
into the river,) appears land-locked, and makes a beautiful harbor.
The banks are very low, of a thin, sandy soil, covered with bushes;
and the right bank is perforated with small channels, running into the
Amazon. The water of the lake is beautifully clear, and of a brown
color; it runs into the Amazon at the rate of three-fourths of a mile
per hour.
We pulled up the right bank of the lake about 2 mile, and stopped
at a little settlement of ten or twelve houses, but could get nothing.
The people seemed afraid of us, and shut their doors in our faces. The
lieutenant, or principal man of the place, said that if we would give
him money, he would send out and get us some fowls and plantains;
but as he was a little drunk at this hour, (seven in the morning,) I would
not trust him. We breakfasted, and sailed at 11.
We passed several small streams coming into the river on the right
bank. Some of these are probably “ Furos,” or small mouths of the
Purus. Jgarapé is the Indian name for a creck or ditch, which is‘filled
with “back-water” from the river; and the term Paranamiri (literally,
little river) is applied to a narrow arm of the main river, running be-
tween the main bank and an island near to it.
260 ' THE CODAJASH.
January 1, 1852.—At 9 a.m. we had the easterly breeze so strong
that we were compelled to keep close in shore to avoid the sea raised
by it. Our heavy flat-bottomed boat rolls nearly gunwales under. Some
of the Indians look alarmed, and Zomas, a servant whom we brought
from Caballo-cocha, is frightened from all propriety. He shouts to the
men to make for the land; and, seizing a paddle, makes one or two
vigorous strokes, but fear takes away his strength, and he stretches him-
self on his face, and yields to what appears his inevitable destiny. Tjurra
is much scandalized at his cowardice, and asks him what he would do
if he got upon the ‘sea.
At 12 m., we passed another mouth of the Purus. These mouths can
only be navigated at high water, and in small canoes. At half-past four
we passed the mouth of the Codajash. We were on the opposite side
of the river, and had nearly passed before I was aware of it. Smyth
places the islands of Coro and Onga above it. They are really below.
The mouth appeared a quarter of a mile wide; but I was afterwards
told that this was not the largest mouth, and that the true mouth lay
opposite to the island of Coro. I learned from some persons who were
engaged in salting fish upon a small sand island just below this mouth,
(one of whom had visited it,) that it is an arm of the river communi-
cating with a large lake abounding with fish, vaca marina, and turtle ;
and had growing on its shores many resins and oils, particularly the
copaiba. It requires three days to ascend the arm of the river to the
lake, and two more to reach the head of the lake, which is fed by small
streams that are said to communicate with the Japura, on one hand,
and the Rio Negro, on the other.
The Amazon, at this little island, commenced falling day before
yesterday. A boat which arrived at Egas from Tabatinga the day be-
tore we left there, reported that the river had commenced falling at
Tabatinga on the twentieth of December. This is probably the fall due
to the “Verano del Nifo” of the Cordillera, and will only last a week
or ten days, when the river will again eommence to swell.
At seven we stopped at a factoria on Coro island, where the party
who were working it had made one thousand pots of manteiga, and
were about starting for below. Camped on the beach on right bank
at half-past 11 p. m.
January 2.—The usual fresh easterly wind commenced at nine.
The ony time to make progress is at night ; during the day the breeze
is so fresh, and the sea so high, that very little is made. The wind _
usually subsides about 4 or 5 p. m., and concludes with a squall of
wind and rain; leaving heavy-looking thunder-clouds in the southward
THE RIVER PURUS. - Ween
and westward. The easterly wind often rises again, and blows for a
few hours at night.
January 3.—We stopped to breakfast at nine, in company with a
schooner bound up. She was three months from Para, and expected
to be another month to Egas. Two others also passed us at a distance
this morning. We arrived at the mouth of the Purus, one hundred
and forty-five miles from Lake Coari. The Amazon is a mile and a
half wide from the right bank to the island of Purus, (which is opposite
the mouth of the river.)’ The mouth of the Purus proper is three-quar-
ters of a mile wide; though a little bay on the left, and the trend of the
right bank off to the northeast, make the two outer points more than a
mile apart. It is a fine-looking river, with moderately bold shores,
masked by a great quantity of bushes growing in the water. These
bushes bore a great number of berries, which, when ripe, are purple,
and about the size of a fox-grape. They were, at this time, green and
ted. The pulp is sweet, and is eaten.
The water of the river is of the same color, and scarcely clearer, than
that of the Amazon. We pulled in about a mile, and found one hun-
dred and eight feet of water, rather nearer the left than the right bank,
with a bottom of soft blue mud. In mid-stream there was seventy-
eight feet, with narrow streaks of sand and mud. In the strong ripples
formed by the meeting of the waters of the two rivers, we found ninety-
six feet ; and when fairly in the stream of the Amazon, one hundred and
thirty-eight feet. I am thus minute in the soundings, because, according
to Smyth, Condamine found no bottom at six hundred and eighteen feet.
A person sounding in a strong tide-way is very apt to be deceived, par-
ticularly if he has a light lead and the bottom is soft; for if he does not
feel it the instant the lead touches the bottom, the current will cause
the line to run out as fast as the lead would sink ; so that the lead may
be on the bottom, and yet the observer, finding the line not checked,
may run out as many fathoms as he has, and think that he has found
no bottom. Ijurra has frequently run out one hundred fathoms where
Ihave afterwards found fifteen and seventeen. The current of the
Purus is, at this time, very sluggish—not over three-quarters of a mile
per hour. Temperature of the water, 844°; that of the Amazon, 83° ;
and the air, 82°. Drifted with the current all night; beautifully calm
and clear.
January 4.—We travelled slowly all day, on account of the fresh
wind and sea. At 7 p. m. we stopped at the village of Pesquera,
- at the mouth of the Lake Afanacapuru, forty-five miles from the mouth
of the Purus. It has only three or four houses, and is situated on a
knee-cracking eminence of one hundred feet in height. The entrance
262 . ENTRANCE OF THE RIO NEGRO.
to the lake is bold and wide—quite three hundred yards across—and
with no bottom, at its mouth, in one hundred and twenty feet. A man
at Pesquera, just from the lake with a cargo of manteiga, and bound to
Para, told me that it was two days’ journey to the opening of the lake ;
that the lake was very long, and about as wide as the Amazon at this
place, (three miles ;) that it was full of islands, and that no one knewits
upper extremity; but that it was reported to communicate with the Ja-
pura. All this country seems cut up with channels from river to river;
but I believe they are canoe channels, and only passable for them at
high water. In many instances these channels, in the rainy season,
widen out into lakes,
The banks of the river are now losing the character of savage and
desolate solitude that characterizes them above, and begin to show signs
of habitation and cultivation. We passed to-day several farms, with
neatly framed and plastered houses, and a schooner-rigged vessel lying
off several of them. :
Januury 5-—At 3 a. m. we passed a rock in the stream called
Calderon, or Big Pot, from the bubbling and boiling of the water over
it when the river is full, At this time the rock is said to be six or eight
feet above the surface of the water. We could hear the rush of the
water against it, but could not see it on account of the darkness of the
night.
We stopped two hours to breakfast, and then drifted with the current
broadside to the wind, (our six men being unable to keep the boat “ head
to it,”) until four, when the wind went down. At five we entered the
Rio Negro. We were made aware of our approach to it before getting
into the mouth. The right bank at the mouth is broken into islands,
and the black water of the Negro runs through the channels between
these islands and alternates, in patches, (refusing to mingle,) with the
muddy waters of the Amazon. The entrance is broad and superb. It
is far the largest tributary of the Amazon I have yet seen; and I esti-
mate its width at the mouth at two miles. There has been no exag-
geration in the description of travellers regarding the blackness of its
water, Lieut. Maw describes it perfectly when he says it looks like
black marble. It well deserves the name of “Rio Negro.” When
taken up in a tumbler, the water is a light-red color, like a pale juniper
water; and I should think it colored by some such berry. A body im-
mersed in it has the color, though wanting the brilliancy, of red Bohe-
mian glass.
It may have been fancy, but I thought the light cumuli that hung
over the river were darker here than elsewhere. These dark, though
_ peaceful-looking clouds, the setting sun, the glitter of the rising moon