238 TRAVELS ON THE RIO NEGRO (March,
place ; and when I returned, he would pay me what he owed
me. So I was forced to make the best of it ; but shortly after
I found that his brother would only go to Jacaré caxoeira, and
thus I was a second time deceived.
On starting, I missed Joio, and found that he had left us
in the village, telling the guardas that he had only agreed with
me to come so far, and they had never said a word to me
about it till now, that it was too late. Antonio’s debt therefore
still remained unpaid, and was even increased by a knife which
Joao had asked for, and I had given him, in order that he
might go on the voyage satisfied.
‘The river now became full of rocks, toa degree to which
even the rockiest part of the Rio Negro was a trifle. All were
low, and would be covered at high-water, while numbers more
remained below the surface, and we were continually striking
against them. ‘That afternoon we passed four more falls, the
“ Uacu ” (a fruit), “ Uacardé” (Egret), “‘ Muctira” (Opossum),
and “Japéna” (oven) caxoeiras. At Uacard there was a
malocca of the same name ; and at Japona another, where we
passed the night. All these rapids we ascended without un-
loading ; but the Uacard was very bad, and occasioned us
much trouble and delay, The next morning, when about to
start, we found that another Indian was missing: he had
absconded in the night, and it was useless attempting to seek
him, though we knew he had gone to Uacard Malocca, where
he wished to stay the day before, but where all knowledge of
him would be denied and he well hidden, had we returned to
fetch him. He was one who had received full payment, making
three who had already gone away in my debt; a not very
encouraging beginning for my voyage.
We passed the “‘ Tyeassu ” (Pig) caxoeira early, and then had
a good stretch of quiet water till midday, when we reached
the “‘ Oomarie” (a fruit) caxoeira, where there is a sitio. Here
we dined off a fine fresh Tucunaré, which an old man sold
me; and I agreed with his son, by the temptation of an axe,
to go with me. We pulled the canoe up this rapid without
unloading, which is seldom done, except when the river is
low, as it now was. ‘The rest of the day we had quiet water,
and stopped at a rock to make our supper and sleep.
March 1st.—We passed the “ Macico” (monkey) caxocira
early. The rocks here, and particularly about Oomarie
1852.] NUMEROUS CATARACTS, 239
caxoeira, were so full of parallel veins, as to give them the
appearance of being stratified and thrown up nearly vertically ;
whereas they are granitic, and similar to those we had already
seen. We then soon reached the “Ird” (Honey) and
“Baccdba” (a Palm) caxoeiras; at both of which there are
figures or picture-writings on the rocks, which I stayed to
sketch. In passing the latter rapid, we knocked off one of
the false keels I had had put to the canoe previous to starting,
to preserve the bottom in the centre, where it was worn very
thin by being dragged over the rocks by its former owner.
We therefore stopped at a sandbank, unloaded the canoe,
and plugged up the nail-holes, which were letting in water very
fast.
The next day we passed in succession the “ Ardra Miri”
(Little Macaw), “Tamaquerié” (Gecko), ‘‘ Paroquet,” ‘‘ Japoé”
(a bird), “ Ardra” (Macaw), “Tati” (Armadillo), “ Amana”
(Rain), “Caméa” (?), “ Yauti” (Tortoise); and, finally, about
three P.M., arrived at “ Carurti” (a water-plant) caxoeira. The
last five of these, before arriving at Carurt, were exceedingly
bad; the passage being generally in the middle of the river,
among rocks, where the water rushes furiously. The falls
were not more than three or four feet each; but, to pull a
loaded canoe up these, against the foaming waters of a large
river, was a matter of the greatest difficulty for my dozen
Indians, their only resting-place being often breast-deep in
water, where it was a matter of wonder that they could stand
against the current, much less exert any force to pull the
canoe. At Ardra fall, the usual passage is over the dry rock,
and we unloaded for that purpose; but all the efforts of the
Indians could not get the heavy canoe up the steep and rugged
ascent which was the only pathway. Again and again they
exerted themselves, but to no purpose; and I was just sending
by an old man, who was passing in a small canoe, to Carurt
for assistance, when he suggested that by getting a long sipé
(the general cable in these rivers) we might obtair. a good
purchase, to pull the canoe up the margin of the fall, which
we had previously tried without success. We accordingly did
so, and by great exertions the difficulty was passed,—much to
my satisfaction, as sending to Caruri would have occasioned
a great and very annoying delay.
The river from Jauarité may be said to average about a
240 TRAVELS ON THE RIO NEGRO. [March,
third of a mile wide, but the bends and turns are innumerable ;
and at every rapid it almost always spreads out into such deep
bays, and is divided into channels by so many rocks and
islands, as to make one sometimes think that the water is
suddenly flowing back in a direction contrary to that it had
previously been taking. Carurti caxoeira itself is greater than
any we had yet seen,—rushing amongst huge rocks down a
descent of perhaps fifteen or twenty feet. ‘The only way of
passing this, was to pull the canoe over the dry rock, which
rose considerably above the level of the water, and was rather
rugged, being interrupted in places by breaks or steps two
or three feet high. The canoe was accordingly unloaded,
quantities of poles and branches cut and laid in the path to
prevent the bottom being much injured by the rocks, and a
messenger sent to the village on the other side of the river
to request the Tushatia to come with plenty of men to our
assistance. He soon arrived with eleven Indians, and all
hands set to work pushing the canoe, or pulling at the sips ;
and even then, the strength of five-and-twenty persons could
only move it by steps, and with great difficulty. However, it
was at length passed, and we then proceeded to the village,
where the Tushata lent us a house.
The canoe was so weak in the bottom in one place, that
I was fearful of some accident in my descent, so I determined
to stay here two or three days, to cut out the weak part and
put in a strong board. I now also saw that this canoe was
much too heavy to proceed further up the river, as at many
of the falls there was no assistance to be obtained, even in
places as difficult to pass as Carurti; so I opened negotiations
to purchase a very large “‘oba” of the Tushata, which, before
leaving, I effected for an axe, a shirt and trousers, two cutlasses,
and some beads. We were delayed here five entire days, owing
to the difficulty of finding a tree of good wood sufficiently
large to give a board of twelve or fourteen inches wide; and
at last I was obliged to be content with two narrow boards,
clumsily inserted, rather than be exposed to more delay.
There was a large malocca here, and a considerable number
of houses. The front of the malocca was painted very taste-
fully in diamonds and circles, with red, yellow, white, and
black. On the rocks were a series of strange figures, of which
TI took a sketch. The Indians were of the ‘ Anands ” or Pine-
THE AMAZON VALLEY. 287
A somewhat similar phenomenon is seen at the mouth of
the Tapajoz. Here, at the end of the dry season, there is but
a small body of water, and the current is very sluggish. The
Amazon, however, rises considerably with the tides, and its
waters then become higher than those of the Tapajéz, and
they therefore enter into that river and force it back ; we then
see the Amazon flowing rapidly down, at the same time that
the Tapajoz is flowing up.
It seems to be still a disputed question among geographers,
whether the Parad river is or is not a branch of the Amazon.
From my own observation, I am decidedly of opinion that it
is not: it appears to me to be merely the outlet of the
Tocantins and of numerous other small streams. The canal
or channel of Tagipurti, which connects it with the Amazon,
and by which all the trade between Pard and the interior is
carried on, is one of a complete network of channels, along
which the tide ebbs and flows, so as in a great measure to
disguise the true direction and velocity of its current. It
seems probable that not a drop of Amazon water finds its way
by this channel into the Para river, and I ground my opinion
upon the following facts.
It is well known, that in a tidal river the ebb-tide will
continue longer than the flood, because the stream of the river
requires to be overcome, and thus delays the commencement
of the flood, while it facilitates that of the ebb. This is very
remarkable in all the smaller rivers about Parad. ‘Taking this
as our guide, we shall be able to ascertain which way the
current in the Tagipurt sets, independently of the tide.
On my journey from Para to the Amazon, our canoe could
only proceed with the tide, having to wait moored to the bank
while it was against us, so that we were of course anxious to
find the time of our tedious stoppages diminished. Up toa
certain point, we always had to wait more time than we were
moving, showing that the current set against us and towards
Pard; but after passing that point, where there was a bend,
and several streams met, we had but a short time to wait, and
a long ebb in our favour, showing that the current was with us
or towards the Amazon, whereas it would evidently have been
different had there been any permanent current flowing from
the Amazon through the Tagipurt towards Pard.
I therefore look upon the Tagipurti as a channel formed by
288 PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY OF
the small streams between the Tocantins and Xingu, meeting
together about Melgdco, and flowing through a low swampy
country in two directions, towards the Amazon, and towards
the Para river.
At high tides the water becomes brackish, even up to the
city of Par4, and a few miles down is quite salt. ‘Vhe tide
flows very rapidly past Pard, up all the adjacent streams, and
as far as the middle of the Tagipurtii channel ; another proof
that a very small portion, if any, of the Amazon water is there
to oppose it.
The curious phenomenon of the bore, or “ piroréco,” in the
rivers Guamad and Moja, I have described and endeavoured to
explain in my Journal, and need not now repeat the account
of it. (See page 89.)
Our knowledge of the courses of most of the tributaries of
the Amazon is very imperfect. The main stream is tolerably
well laid down in the maps as far as regards its general course
and the most important bends; the details, however, are very
incorrect. The numerous islands and parallel channels,—the
great lakes and offsets,--the deep bays,—and the varying
widths of the stream, are quite unknown. Even the French
survey from Para to Obidos, the only one which can lay claim
to detailed accuracy, gives no idea of the river, because only
one channel is laid down. I obtained at Santarem a manu-
script map of the lower part of the river, much more correct
than any other I have seen. It was, with most of my other
papers, lost on my voyage home; but I hope to be able to
obtain another copy from the same party. ‘The Madeira and
the Rio Negro are the only other branches of the Amazon
whose courses are at all accurately known, and the maps of
them are very deficient in anything like detail. The other
great rivers, the Xingu, the Tapajoz, the Purtis, Coari, Teffe,
Jurud, Jutai, Jabarf, I¢d, Japurd, etc., though all inserted in
our maps, are put in quite by guess, or from the vaguest
information of the general direction of their course. Between
the Tocantins and the Madeira, and between the Madeira and
the Uaycali, there are two tracts of country of five hundred
thousand square miles each, or each twice as large as I’rance,
and as completely unexplored as the interior of Africa.
The Rio Negro is one of the most unknown in its charac-
teristic features ; although, as before stated, its general course
THE AMAZON VALLEY. 289
is laid down with tolerable accuracy. J have narrated in my
Journal how I was prevented from descending on the north
side of it, and thus completing my survey of its course.
The most remarkable feature is the enormous width to
which it spreads,—first, between Barra and the mouth of the
Rio Branco, and from thence to near St. Isabel. In some
places, I am convinced, it is between twenty and thirty
miles wide, and, for a very great distance, fifteen to twenty.
The sources of the rivers Uaupés, Isanna, Xié, Rio Negro, and
Guaviare, are very incorrectly laid down. ‘The Serra Tunuhy
is generally represented as a chain of hills cutting off these
rivers ; it is, however, a group of isolated granite peaks, about
two thousand feet high, situated on the north bank of the river
Isanna, in about 1° north latitude and 70° west longitude.
The river rises considerably beyond them, in a flat forest-
country, and further west than the Rio Negro, for there is a
path across to the Iniriza, a branch of the Guaviare which does
not traverse any stream, so that the Rio Negro does not there
exist.
My own journey up the Uaupés extended to near 72° west
longitude. Jive days further in a small canoe, or about a
hundred miles, is the Jurupari caxoeira, the last fall on the river.
Above that, traders have been twelve days’ journey on a still,
almost currentless river, which, by the colour of its water, and
the aspect of its vegetation, resembles the Upper Amazon. For
all this distance, which must reach very nearly to the base of
the Andes, the river flows through virgin forest. But the
Indians in the upper part say there are campos, or plains,
and cattle, further up; and they possess Spanish knives
and other articles, showing that they have communications
with the civilised inhabitants of the ,country to the east of
Bogota.
I am therefore strongly inclined to believe that the rivers
Ariari and others, rising about a hundred miles south of Bogota,
are not, as shown in all our maps, the sources of the Guaviare,
but of the Uaupés, and that the basin of the Amazon must
therefore be here extended to within sixty miles of the city of
Bogota. ‘This opinion is strengthened by information obtained
from the Indians of Javita, who annually ascend the Guaviare
to fish in the dry season, and who state that the river is very
small, and in its upper part, where some hills occur and the
HQ)
142 TRAVELS ON THE RIO NEGRO. [October,
masses just rising above the foaming waters. ‘All right,
boys!” cries Senhor L.; and just as we seemed in the greatest
danger, the canoe wheels round in an eddy, and we are safe
under the shelter of a rock. We are in still water, but close
on each side of us it rages and bubbles, and we must cross
again. Now the Indians are rested; and so off we go,—down
drops the canoe,—again the men strain at their paddles,—
again we are close on some foaming breakers : I see no escape,
but in a moment we are in an eddy caused by a sunken mass
above us; again we go on, and reach at length our object, a
rocky island, round which we pull and push our canoe, and
from the upper point cross to another, and so make a zigzag
course, until, after some hours’ hard work, we at length reach
the bank, perhaps not fifty yards above the obstacle which had
obliged us to leave it.
‘Thus we proceeded, till, reaching a good resting-place about
five in the afternoon, we stayed for the night to rest the Indians
well, against the further fatigues to be encountered the follow-
ing day.
Most of the principal rapids and falls have names. ‘There
are the “Turnos ” (ovens), “‘Tabocal” (bamboo), and many
others. The next day we went on in a similar manner to the
day before, along a most picturesque part of the river. The
brilliant sun, the sparkling waters, the strange fantastic rocks,
and broken woody islands, were a constant source of interest
and enjoyment to me. Early in the afternoon we reached the
village of Sdo Gabriel, where are the principal falls. Here the
river is narrower, and an island in the middle divides it into
two channels, along each of which rolls a tremendous flood of
water down an incline formed by submerged rocks. Below,
the water boils up in great rolling breakers, and, a little further
down, forms dangerous eddies and whirlpools. Here we could
only pass by unloading the canoe almost entirely, and then
pulling it up amidst the foaming water as near as possible to
the shore. This done, Senhor L. and myself dressed, and
proceeded up the hill to the house of the Commandante, who
must give permission before any one can pass above the fort.
He was a friend of Senhor L., and I brought him a letter of
introduction ; so he was pretty civil, gave us some coffee,
chatted of the news of the river and the city for an hour or
two, and invited us to breakfast with him before we left the
r)
1850.] NOSSA SENHORA DA GU/A. 143
next morning. We then went to the house of an old Por-
tuguese trader, whom I had met in Barra, with whom we
supped and spent the evening.
‘The next morning, after breakfasting with the Commandante,
we proceeded on our way. Above Sao Gabriel the rapids are
perhaps more numerous than below. We twisted about the
river, round islands and from rock to rock, in a most complicated
manner. On a point where we stayed for the night I saw the
first tree-fern I had yet met with, and looked on it with much
pleasure, as an introduction to a new and interesting district:
it was a small, thin-stemmed, elegant species, about eight or
ten feet high. At night, on the 22nd, we passed the last rapid,
and now had smooth water before us for the rest of our journey.
We had thus been four days ascending these rapids, which are
about thirty miles in length. The next morning we entered
the great and unknown river ‘‘ Uaupés,” from which there is
another branch into the Rio Negro, forming a delta at its
mouth. During our voyage I had heard much of this river
from Senhor L., who was an old trader up it, and well acquainted
with the numerous tribes of uncivilised Indians which inhabit
its banks, and with the countless cataracts and rapids which
render its navigation so dangerous and toilsome. Above the
Uaupés the Rio Negro was calm and placid, about a mile, or
sometimes two to three miles wide, and its waters blacker
than ever.
On the 24th of October, early in the morning, we reached
the little village of Nossa Senhora da Guia, where Senhor L.
resided, and where he invited me to remain with him as long
as I felt disposed.
The village is situated on high ground sloping down suddenly
to the river. It consists of a row of thatched mud-huts, some
of them whitewashed, others the colour of the native earth.
Immediately behind are some patches of low sandy ground,
covered with a shrubby vegetation, and beyond is the virgin
forest. Senhor L.’s house had wooden doors, and shutters to
the windows, as had also one or two others. In fact, Guia was
once a very populous and decent village, though now as poor
and miserable as all the others of the Rio Negro. Going up
to the house J was introduced to Senhor L.’s family, which
consisted of two grown-up daughters, two young ones, and a
little boy of eight years old, A good-looking “ mameltica,” or
144 TRAVELS ON THE RIO NEGRO, [November,
half-breed woman, of about thirty, was introduced as the
“mother of his younger children.” Senhor L. had informed
me during the voyage that he did not patronise marriage, and
thought everybody a great fool who did. He had illustrated
the advantages of keeping oneself free of such ties by informing
me that the mother of his two elder daughters having grown
old, and being unable to bring them up properly or teach them
Portuguese, he had turned her out of doors, and got a younger
and more civilised person in her place. The poor woman had
since died of jealousy, or “passion,” as he termed it. When
young, she had nursed him during an eighteen months’ illness
and saved his life ; but he seemed to think he had performed
a duty in turning her away,—for, said he, “ She was an Indian,
and could only speak her own language, and, so long as she
was with them, my children would never learn Portuguese.”
‘The whole family welcomed him ina very cold and timid
manner, coming up and asking his blessing as if they had
parted from him the evening before, instead of three months
since. We then had some coffee and breakfast; after which
the canoe was unloaded, and a little house just opposite his,
which happened to be unoccupied, was swept out forme. My
boxes were placed in it, my hammock hung up, and I soon
made myself comfortable in my new quarters, and then walked
out to look about me.
In the village were about a dozen houses belonging to Indians,
all of whom had their sitios, or country-houses, at from a few
hours’ to some days’ distance up or down the river, or on some
of the small tributary streams. ‘They only inhabit the village
at times of festas, or on the arrival of a merchant like Senhor
L., when they bring any produce they may have to dispose of
or, if they have none, get what goods they can on credit, with
the promise of payment at some future time.
There were now several families in the village to welcome
their sons and husbands, who had formed our crew ; and for some
days there was a general drinking and dancing from morning
to night. During this time, I took my gun into the woods, in
order to kill a few birds. Immediately behind the house were
some fruit-trees, to which many chatterers and other pretty
birds resorted, and I managed to shoot some every day.
Insects were very scarce in the forest; but on the river-side
there were often to be found rare butterflies, though not in
1851.] THE PIMICHIN RIVER. 165
About a mile above Marda, we reached the entrance of the
little river Pimichin, up which we were to ascend. At the very
mouth was a rock filling up the channel, and we had great
difficulty in passing. We then had deep water for some
distance, but came again to rocks and reedy shallows, where
our heavily-laden canoe was only got over by great exertions. At
night we reached a fine sandy beach, where we stayed, but had
not been fortunate enough to get any fish, so had nothing for
supper but farinha mingau and a cup of coffee; and I then
hung my hammock under a little palm-leaf shed, that had been
made by some former traveller.
Our breakfast was a repetition of our supper, and we again
started onwards, but every half hour had to stop and partly
unload our boat, and drag it over some impediment. In many
places there was a smooth ledge of rock with only a little water
trickling over it, or a series of steps forming minature cascades.
The stream was now sunk in a little channel or ravine fifteen
or twenty feet deep, and with an interminable succession of
turnings and windings towards every point of the compass.
At length, late in the evening, we reached the port of Pimichin,
formerly a village, but now containing only two houses. We
found an old shed without doors and with a leaky roof—the
traveller’s house—of which we took possession.
Our canoe being unloaded, I went to one of the cottages to
forage, and found a Portuguese deserter, a very civil fellow,
who gave me the only eatable thing he had in the house,
which was a piece of smoke-dried fish, as hard as a board and
as tough as leather. ‘This I gave to the Indians, and got him
to come and take a cup of coffee with me, which, though he
had some coffee-trees around his house, was still quite a treat,
as he had no sugar or molasses. Jrom this place a road leads
overland about ten miles through the forest to Javita, a
village on the Témi, a branch of the Atabapo, which flows
into the Orinooko. Finding that I could get nothing to cat
here, I could not remain, as I had at first intended, but was
obliged to get my things all carried by road to Javita, and
determined to walk over the next day to see about getting men
to do it. In the evening I took-my gun, and strolled along the
road a little way into the forest; at the place I had so long looked
forward to reaching, and was rewarded by falling in with one
of the lords of the soil, which I had long wished to encounter,
166 TRAVELS ON THE RIO NEGRO. [February
As I was walking quietly along I saw a large jet-black
animal come out of the forest about twenty yards before me,
which took me so much by surprise that I did not at first
imagine what it was. As it moved slowly on, and- its whole
body and long curving tail came into full view in the middle
of the road, I saw that it was a fine black jaguar. I involun-
tarily raised my gun to my shoulder, but remembering that
both barrels were loaded with small shot, and that to fire would
exasperate without killing him, I stood silently gazing. In the
middle of the road he turned his head, and for an instant
paused and gazed at me, but having, I suppose, other business
of his own to attend to, walked steadily on, and disappeared in
the thicket. As he advanced, I heard the scampering of small
animals, and the whizzing flight of ground birds, clearing the
path for their dreaded enemy.
This encounter pleased me much. J was too much surprised,
and occupied too much with admiration, to feel fear. I had
at length had a full view, in his native wilds, of the rarest
variety of the most powerful and dangerous animal inhabiting
the American continent. I was, however, by no means desirous
of a second meeting, and, as it was near sunset, thought it most
prudent to turn back towards the village.
The next morning I sent all my Indians to fish, and walked
myself along the road to Javita, and thus crossed the division
between the basins of the Amazon and the Orinooko. ‘The
road is, generally speaking, level, consisting of a series of
slight ascents and descents, nowhere ptobably varying more
than fifty feet in elevation, and a great part of it being over
swamps and marshes, where numerous small streams intersect
it. At those places roughly squared trunks of trees are laid
down longitudinally, forming narrow paths or bridges, over
which passengers have to walk.
The road is about twenty or thirty feet wide, running nearly
straight through a lofty forest. On the sides grow numbers of
the Inaj4 palm (Maximiliana regia), the prickly Mauritia
(AZ, aculeata) in the marshes, and that curious palm the
Piassdba, which produces the fibrous substance now used for
making brooms and brushes in this country for street-sweeping
and domestic purposes. ‘This is the first and almost the only
point where this curious tree can be seen, while following any
regular road or navigation. From the mouth of the Padauari{
1851.] THE PIASSABA PALM. 167
(a branch of the Rio Negro about five hundred miles above
Barra), it is found on several rivers, but never on the banks
of the main stream itself. A great part of the population of
the Upper Rio Negro is employed in obtaining the fibre
for exportation; and I thus became acquainted with all the
localities in which it is found. ‘These are the rivers Padauari,
Jaha, and Darahd on the north bank of the Rio Negro, and
the Marié and Xié on the south. The other two rivers, the
Maravihé and Cababuris, on the north, have not a tree;
neither have the Curicuriari, Uaupés, and Isdnna, on the
south, though they flow between the Marié and the Xié, where
it abounds. In the whole of the district about the Upper Rio
Negro above Sao Carlos, and about the Atabapo and its
branches, it is abundant, and just behind the village of Témo
was where I first saw it. It grows in moist places, and is
about twenty or thirty feet high, with the leaves large, pinnate,
shining, and very smooth and regular. The whole stem is
covered with a thick coating of the fibres, hanging down like
coarse hair, and growing from the bases of the leaves, which
remain attached to the stem. Large parties of men, women,
and children go into the forests to cut this fibre. It is exten-
sively used in its native country for cables and small ropes for
all the canoes and larger vessels on the Amazon. Humboldt
alludes to this plant by the native Venezuelan name of
Chiquichiqui, but does not appear to have seen it, though he
passed along this road. I believe it to be a species of Leo-
poldinia, of which two other kinds occur in the Rio Negro
and, like this tree, are found there only. I could not find
it in flower or fruit, but took a sketch of its general appearance,
and have called it Zeopoldinia Piassaba, from its native name,
in the greater part of the district which it inhabits.
On approaching the end of the road I came to a “rhossa,”
or cleared field, where I found a tall, stout Indian planting
cassava. He addressed me with “ Buenos dias,” and asked
me where I was going, and if I wanted anything at the village,
for that the Commissario was away, and he was the Capitio.
I replied in the best Spanish I could muster up for the
occasion, and we managed to understand each other pretty
well. He was rather astonished when I told him I was going
to stay at the village, and seemed very doubtful of my inten-
tions. I informed him, however, that I was a “‘Naturalista,”